EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
Wilfrid Sellars
Edited in Hypertext by Andrew Chrucky, 1995. 
   Note: This paper was first presented as the University of London Special 
Lectures on Philosophy for 1955-56, delivered on March 1, 8, and 15, 
1956,  under  the  title  "The  Myth  of  the  Given:  Three  Lectures  on 
Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind."    
   Reproduced with the permission of the University of Minnesota Press 
from:  Wilfrid  Sellars,  "Empiricism  and  the  Philosophy  of  Mind,"  in 
Herbert  Feigl  and  Michael  Scriven,  eds.,  Minnesota  Studies  in  the 
Philosophy of Science, Volume I: The Foundations of Science and the 
Concepts  of  Psychology  and  Psychoanalysis (University of Minnesota 
Press, 1956), pp. 253-329. When the essay was reprinted in Wilfrid Sellars, 
Science, Perception and Reality (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1963, 
pp 127-196), Sellars added a few notes which have been incorporated into 
the present version. I should also add that in the reprint British spelling was 
used. Republished as a separate book, Empiricism and the Philosophy of 
Mind, with an introduction by Richard Rorty and a study guide by Robert 
Brandom  (Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard  University  Press,  1997). 
Republished in Willem deVries and Timm Triplett, Knowledge, Mind, and 
the Given: A Reading of Sellars' "Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind" 
(Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Pub., 2000). French translation  Empirisme et 
philosophie de l'esprit (Combas (France): l'Eclat, 1992). 
    (This version follows the pagination found in Wilfrid Sellars, Science, 
Perception and Reality (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1963, pp.127-
196.)
127
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
Wilfrid Sellars
I. AN AMBIGUITY IN SENSE-DATUM THEORIES
I PRESUME that no philosopher who has attacked the philosophical idea of 
givenness or, to use the Hegelian term, immediacy has intended to deny that 
there is a difference between  inferring that something is the case and, for 
example, seeing it to be the case. If the term "given" referred merely to what is 
observed as being observed, or, perhaps, to a proper subset of the things we are 
said  to  determine  by  observation,  the  existence  of  "data"  would  be  as 
noncontroversial as the existence of philosophical perplexities. But, of course, 
this just  is not so.  The  phrase "the  given"  as a piece  of professional  -- 
epistemological -- shoptalk carries a substantial theoretical commitment, and 
one can deny that there are "data" or that anything is, in this sense, "given" 
without flying in the face of reason. 
    Many things have been said to be "given": sense contents, material objects, 
universals,  propositions,  real  connections,  first  principles,  even  givenness 
itself. And there is, indeed, a certain way of construing the situations which 
philosophers analyze in these terms which can be said to be the framework of 
givenness. This framework has been a common feature of most of the major 
systems of  philosophy, including,  to  use  a  Kantian  turn of  phrase,  both 
"dogmatic rationalism" and "skeptical empiricism". It has, indeed, been so 
pervasive  that  few,  if  any, philosophers  have  been  altogether  free  of  it; 
certainly not Kant, and, I would argue, not even Hegel, that great foe of 
"immediacy". Often what is attacked under its name are only specific varieties 
of "given." Intuited first principles and synthetic necessary connections were 
the first to come under attack. And many who today attack "the whole idea of 
givenness" -- and they are an increasing number -- are really only attacking 
sense data. For they transfer to other items, say physical objects or relations of 
appearing, the characteristic features 

128
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
of the "given." If, however, I begin my argument with an attack on sense-
datum theories, it is only as a first step in a general critique of the entire 
framework of givenness. 
    2. Sense-datum theories characteristically distinguish between an act of 
awareness and, for example, the color patch which is its object. The act is 
usually  called  sensing.  Classical  exponents  of  the  theory  have  often 
characterized these acts as "phenomenologically simple" and "not further 
analyzable." But other sense-datum theorists -- some of them with an equal 
claim to be considered "classical exponents" -- have held that sensing is 
analyzable. And if some philosophers seem to have thought that if sensing 
is analyzable, then it cannot be an  act, this has by no means been the 
general opinion. There are, indeed, deeper roots for the doubt that sensing 
(if there is such a thing) is an act, roots which can be traced to one of two 
lines of thought tangled together in classical sense-datum theory. For the 
moment, however, I shall simply assume that however complex (or simple) 
the fact that x is sensed may be, it has the form, whatever exactly it may be, 
by virtue of which for x to be sensed is for it to be the object of an act. 
    Being a sense datum, or sensum, is a relational property of the item that 
is sensed. To refer to an item which is sensed in a way which does not 
entail that it is sensed, it is necessary to use some other locution. Sensibile 
has the disadvantage that it implies that sensed items could exist without 
being sensed, and  this is a matter of controversy among sense-datum 
theorists. Sense content is, perhaps, as neutral a term as any. 
    There appear to be varieties of sensing, referred to by some as visual 
sensing,  tactual sensing, etc., and by others as  directly seeing,  directly 
hearing, etc. But it is not clear whether these are species of sensing in any 
full-blooded sense, or whether "x is visually sensed" amounts to no more 
than "x is a color patch which is sensed," "x is directly heard" than "x is a 
sound which is sensed" and so on. In the latter case, being a visual sensing 
or a direct hearing would be a relational property of an act of sensing, just 
as being a sense datum is a relational property of a sense content. 
    3. Now if we bear in mind that the point of the epistemological category 
of the given is, presumably, to explicate the idea that empirical knowledge 
rests on a 'foundation' of non-inferential knowledge of matter of fact, we 
may well experience a feeling of surprise on noting that according to sense-
datum theorists, it is particulars that are sensed. For what is known even in 
non-inferential knowledge, is facts rather than particulars, items of the form 
something's  being  thus-and-so or  something's  standing  in  a  certain 
relation to something else. It would seem, then, that the sensing of sense 
contents cannot constitute knowledge, inferential or non-inferential; and if 
so, we may well ask, 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
129
what light does the concept of a sense datum throw on the 'foundations of 
empirical knowledge?' The sense-datum theorist, it would seem, must choose 
between saying: 
It is particulars which are sensed. Sensing is not knowing. The existence of 
sense data does not logically imply the existence of knowledge. 
or 
Sensing  is a form of knowing. It is  facts rather than  particulars which are 
sensed. 
On alternative (a) the fact that a sense content was sensed would be a non-
epistemic fact about the sense content. Yet it would be hasty to conclude that 
this alternative precludes any logical connection between the sensing of sense 
contents and the possession of non-inferential knowledge. For even if the 
sensing  of  sense  contents  did  not  logically imply the  existence  of  non-
inferential  knowledge,  the  converse  might  well  be  true.  Thus,  the  non-
inferential knowledge of particular matter of fact might logically imply the 
existence of sense data (for example, seeing that a certain physical object is 
red might logically imply sensing a red sense content) even though the sensing 
of a red sense content were not itself a cognitive fact and did not imply the 
possession of non-inferential knowledge. 
    On the second alternative, (b), the sensing of sense contents would logically 
imply the existence of non-inferential knowledge for the simple reason that it 
would  be this knowledge. But, once again, it would be facts rather than 
particulars which are sensed. 
    4. Now it might seem that when confronted by this choice, the sense-datum 
theorist seeks to have his cake and eat it. For he characteristically insists both 
that sensing is a knowing and that it is particulars which are sensed. Yet his 
position is by no means as hopeless as this formulation suggests. For the 
'having' and the 'eating' can be combined without logical nonsense provided 
that he uses the word know and, correspondingly, the word given in two senses. 
He must say something like the following: 
The non-inferential knowing on which our world picture rests is the knowing 
that certain items, e.g. red sense contents, are of a certain character, e.g. red. 
When such a fact is non-inferentially known about a sense content, I will say 
that the sense content is sensed as being, e.g. red. I will then say that a sense 
content is sensed (full stop) if it is sensed as being of a certain character, e.g. 
red. Finally, I will say of a sense content that it is known if it is sensed (full 
stop), to emphasize that sensing is a cognitive or epistemic fact. 
    Notice that, given these stipulations, it is logically necessary that if a sense 
content be sensed, it be sensed as being of a certain character, and that if it be 
sensed as being of a certain character, the fact that it is 

130
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
of this character be  non-inferentially known. Notice also that the being 
sensed of a sense content would be knowledge only in a stipulated sense of 
know. To say of a sense content -- a color patch, for example -- that it was 
'known' would be to say that  some fact about it was non-inferentially 
known, e.g. that it was red. This stipulated use of know would, however, 
receive aid and comfort from the fact there is, in ordinary usage, a sense of 
know in which it is followed by a noun or descriptive phrase which refers to 
a particular, thus 
Do you know John?
Do you know the President? 
Because these questions are equivalent to "Are you acquainted with John?" 
and "Are you acquainted with the President?" the phrase "knowledge by 
acquaintance" recommends itself as a useful metaphor for this stipulated 
sense of  know and, like other useful metaphors, has congealed into a 
technical term. 
    5. We have seen that the fact that a sense content is a datum (if, indeed, 
there are such facts) will logically imply that someone has non-inferential 
knowledge  only if to say that a sense content is given is contextually 
defined in terms of non-inferential knowledge of a fact about this sense 
content. If this is not clearly realized or held in mind, sense-datum theorists 
may come to think of the givenness of sense contents as the  basic or 
primitive concept of the sense-datum framework, and thus sever the logical 
connection between sense data and non-inferential knowledge to which the 
classical form of the theory is committed. This brings us face to face with 
the fact that in spite of the above considerations, many if not most sense-
datum theorists have thought of the givenness of sense contents as the basic 
notion of the sense-datum framework. What, then, of the logical connection 
in  the  direction  sensing  sense  contents --> having  non-inferential 
knowledge? Clearly it is severed by those who think of sensing as a unique 
and unanalyzable act. Those, on the other hand, who conceive of sensing as 
an analyzable fact, while they have prima facie severed this connection (by 
taking the sensing of sense contents to be the basic concept of the sense-
datum framework), will nevertheless, in a sense, have maintained it, if the 
result they get by analzing x is a red sense datum turns out to be the same 
as the result they get when they analyze x is non-inferentially known to be 
red. The entailment which was thrown out the front door would have 
sneaked in by the back. 
    It is interesting to note, in this connection, that those who, in the classical 
period of sense-datum theories, say from Moore's "Refutation of Idealism" 
until about 1938, analyzed or sketched an analysis of sensing, did so in 
non-epistemic terms. Typically it was held that for a sense content to be 
sensed is for it to be an element in a certain 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
131
kind of relational array of sense contents, where the relations which constitute 
the array are such relations as spatiotemporal juxtaposition (or overlapping), 
constant conjunction, mnemic causation -- even real connection and belonging 
to a self. There is, however, one class of terms which is conspicuous by its 
absence, namely cognitive terms. For these, like the 'sensing' which was under 
analysis, were taken to belong to a higher level of complexity. 
    Now the idea that epistemic facts can be analyzed without remainder -- even 
"in  principle  "  -- into  non-epistemic  facts,  whether  phenomenological  or 
behavioral,  public  or  private,  with no  matter  how lavish  a  sprinkling  of 
subjunctives and hypotheticals is, I believe, a radical mistake -- a mistake of a 
piece with the so-called "naturalistic fallacy" in ethics. I shall not, however, 
press this point for the moment, though it will be a central theme in a later 
stage of my argument. What I do want to stress is that whether classical sense-
datum philosophers have conceived of the givenness of sense contents as 
analyzable  in  non-epistemic  terms,  or  as  constituted  by  acts  which  are 
somehow both irreducible  and knowings, they have without exception taken 
them to be fundamental in another sense. 
    6. For they have taken givenness to be a fact which presupposes no learning, 
no forming of associations, no setting up of stimulus-response connections. In 
short, they have tended to equate sensing sense contents with being conscious, 
as a person who has been hit on the head is not conscious, whereas a new-born 
babe, alive and kicking, is conscious. They would admit, of course, that the 
ability to know that a person, namely oneself, is now, at a certain time, feeling 
a pain,  is acquired and does presuppose a (complicated) process of concept 
formation. But, they would insist, to suppose that the simple ability to feel a 
pain or see a color, in short, to sense sense contents, is acquired and involves a 
process of concept formation, would be very odd indeed. 
    But if a sense-datum philosopher takes the ability to sense sense contents to 
be unacquired, he is clearly precluded from offering an analysis of x senses a 
sense content which presupposes acquired abilities. It follows that he could 
analyze x senses red sense content s as x non-inferentially knows that s is red 
only if he is prepared to admit that the ability to have such non-inferential 
knowledge as that, for example, a red sense content is red, is itself unacquired. 
And this brings us face to face with the fact that most empirically minded 
philosophers are strongly inclined to think all classificatory consciousness, all 
knowledge  that  something  is  thus-and-so,  or,  in  logicians'  jargon,  all 
subsumption  of  particulars  under  universals,  involves  learning,  concept 
formation, even the use of symbols.  It  is clear  from the above  analysis, 
therefore, that classical sense-datum theories -- I 

132
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
emphasize  the  adjective,  for  there  are  other,  'heterodox,'  sense-datum 
theories to be taken into account -- are confronted by an inconsistent triad 
made up of the following three propositions: 
A. x senses red sense content s entails x non-inferentially knows that s 
is red. 
B. The ability to sense sense contents is unacquired.
C. The ability to know facts of the form x is ø is acquired. 
A and B together entail not-C; B and C entail not-A; A and C entail not-B. 
    Once the classical sense-datum theorist faces up to the fact that A, B, and 
C do form an inconsistent triad, which of them will he choose to abandon? 
  He can abandon A, in which case the sensing of sense contents becomes a 
noncognitive  fact -- a  noncognitive  fact,  to  be  sure which may be  a 
necessary  condition,  even  a  logically necessary  condition,  of  non-
inferential knowledge, but a fact, nevertheless, which cannot constitute this 
knowledge. 
    He can abandon B, in which case he must pay the price of cutting off the 
concept of a sense datum from its connection with our ordinary talk about 
sensations, feelings, afterimages, tickles and itches, etc., which are usually 
thought by sense-datum theorists to be its common sense counterparts. 
    But to abandon C is to do violence to the predominantly nominalistic 
proclivities of the empiricist tradition. 
    7. It certainly begins to look as though the classical concept of a sense 
datum were a mongrel resulting from a crossbreeding of two ideas: 
The idea that there are certain inner episodes -- e.g. sensations of red or C# 
which can occur to human beings (and brutes) without any prior process of 
learning or concept formation; and without which it would in some sense 
be impossible to  see, for example, that the facing surface of a physical 
object is red and triangular, or hear that a certain physical sound is C#. 
The idea that there are certain inner episodes which are non-inferential 
knowings that certain items are, for example, red or C#; and that these 
episodes are the necessary conditions of empirical knowledge as providing 
the evidence for all other empirical propositions. 
And I think that once we are on the lookout for them, it is quite easy to see 
how  these  two  ideas  came  to  be  blended  together  in  traditional 
epistemology. The first idea clearly arises in the attempt to explain 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
133
the facts of sense perception in scientific style. How does it happen that people 
can have the experience which they describe by saying "It is as though I were 
seeing a red and triangular physical object" when either there is no physical 
object  there  at  all,  or,  if  there  is,  it  is  neither  red  nor  triangular?  The 
explanation, roughly, posits that in every case in which a person has an 
experience of this kind, whether veridical or not, he has what is called a 
'sensation' or 'impression' 'of a red triangle.' The core idea is that the proximate 
cause of such a sensation is  only for the most part brought about by the 
presence in the neighborhood of the perceiver of a red and triangular physical 
object; and that while a baby, say, can have the 'sensation of a red triangle' 
without either seeing or seeming to see that the facing side of a physical object 
is red and triangular, there usually looks, to adults, to be a physical object with 
a red and triangular facing surface, when they are caused to have a 'sensation 
of a red triangle'; while without such a sensation, no such experience can be 
had. 
    I shall have a great deal more to say about this kind of 'explanation' of 
perceptual situations in the course of my argument. What I want to emphasize 
for the moment, however, is that, as far as the above formulation goes, there is 
no reason to suppose that having the sensation of a red triangle is a cognitive or 
epistemic fact. There  is,  of  course,  a  temptation  to  assimilate  "having a 
sensation of a red triangle" to "thinking of a celestial city" and to attribute to 
the former the epistemic character, the 'intentionality' of the latter. But this 
temptation could be resisted, and it could be held that having a sensation of a 
red triangle is a fact sui generis, neither epistemic nor physical, having its own 
logical  grammar.  Unfortunately,  the  idea  that  there  are  such  things  as 
sensations of red triangles -- in itself, as we shall see, quite legitimate, though 
not without its puzzles -- seems to fit the requirements of another, and less 
fortunate, line of thought so well that it has almost invariably been distorted to 
give the latter a reinforcement without which it would long ago have collapsed. 
This unfortunate, but familiar, line of thought runs as follows: 
The seeing that the facing surface of a physical object is red and triangular is a 
veridical member of a class of experiences -- let us call them 'ostensible 
seeings' -- some of the members of which are non-veridical; and there is no 
inspectible hallmark which guarantees that any such experience is veridical. To 
suppose that the non-inferential knowledge on which our world picture rests 
consists of such ostensible seeings, hearings, etc., as happen to be veridical is 
to place empirical knowledge on too precarious a footing -- indeed, to open the 
door to skepticism by making a mockery of the word knowledge in the phrase 
"empirical knowledge." 
Now it is, of course, possible to delimit subclasses of ostensible 

134
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
seeings, hearings, etc., which are progressively less precarious, i.e. more 
reliable, by specifying the circumstances in which they occur, and the 
vigilance of the perceiver. But the possibility that any given ostensible 
seeing, hearing, etc., is non-veridical can never be entirely eliminated. 
Therefore, given that the foundation of empirical knowledge cannot consist 
of the veridical members of a class not all the members of which are 
veridical, and from which the non-veridical members cannot be weeded out 
by 'inspection,' this foundation cannot consist of such items as seeing that 
the facing surface of a physical object is red and triangular. 
    Thus baldly put, scarcely anyone would accept this conclusion. Rather 
they would take the contrapositive of the argument, and reason that since 
the foundation of empirical knowledge is the non-inferential knowledge of 
such facts, it  does consist of members of a class which contains non-
veridical members. But before it is thus baldly put, it gets tangled up with 
the first line of thought. The idea springs to mind that sensations of red 
triangles have  exactly  the  virtues  which  ostensible  seeings  of  red 
triangular physical surfaces lack. To begin with, the grammatical similarity 
of 'sensation of a red triangle' to "thought of a celestial city" is interpreted 
to mean, or, better, gives rise to the presupposition, that sensations belong 
to the same general pigeonhole as thoughts -- in short, are cognitive facts. 
Then, it is noticed that sensations are  ex hypothesi far more intimately 
related to mental processes than external physical objects. It would seem 
easier to "get at" a red triangle of which we are having a sensation, than to 
"get at" a red and triangular physical surface. But, above all, it is the fact 
that it doesn't make sense to speak of unveridical sensations which strikes 
these philosophers, though for it to strike them as it does, they must 
overlook the fact that if it makes sense to speak of an experience as 
veridical it must correspondingly make sense to speak of it as unveridical. 
Let me emphasize that not all sense-datum theorists -- even of the classical 
type -- have been guilty of  all these confusions; nor are these  all the 
confusions of which sense-datum theorists have been guilty. I shall have 
more to say on this topic later. But the confusions I have mentioned are 
central to the tradition, and will serve my present purpose. For the upshot 
of blending all these ingredients together is the idea that a sensation of a 
red triangle is the very paradigm of empirical knowledge. And I think that 
it can readily be seen that this ideal leads straight to the orthodox type of 
sense-datum theory and accounts for the perplexities which arise when one 
tries to think it through. 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
135
II. ANOTHER LANGUAGE?
8. I shall now examine briefly a heterodox suggestion by, for example, Ayer 
{1} to the effect that discourse about sense data is, so to speak, another 
language, a language contrived by the epistemologist, for the situations which 
the plain man describes by means of such locutions as "Now the book looks 
green to me" and "There seems to be a red and triangular object over there." 
The core of this suggestion is the idea that the vocabulary of sense data 
embodies no increase in the content of descriptive discourse, as over and 
against the plain man's language of physical objects in Space and Time, and 
the properties they have and appear to have. For it holds that sentences of the 
form 
X presents S with a f sense datum 
are simply stipulated to have the same force as sentences of the form 
X looks f to S. 
Thus "The tomato presents S with a bulgy red sense-datum" would be the 
contrived counterpart of "The tomato looks red and bulgy to S" and would 
mean exactly what the latter means for the simple reason that it was stipulated 
to do so. 
    As an aid to explicating this suggestion, I am going to make use of a certain 
picture. I am going to start with the idea of a code, and I am going to enrich 
this notion until the codes I am talking about are no longer  mere codes. 
Whether one wants to call these "enriched codes" codes at all is a matter which 
I shall not attempt to decide. 
    Now a code, in the sense in which I shall use the term, is a system of 
symbols each of which represents a complete sentence. Thus, as we initially 
view the situation, there are two characteristic features of a code: (1) Each 
code symbol is a unit; the parts of a code symbol are not themselves code 
symbols.  (2)  Such  logical  relations  as  obtain  among  code  symbols  are 
completely parasitical; they derive entirely from logical relations among the 
sentences they represent. Indeed, to speak about logical relations among code 
symbols is a way of talking which is introduced in terms of the logical relations 
among the sentences they represent. Thus, if "O" stands for "Everybody on 
board is sick" and "D" for "Somebody on board is sick", then "D" would 
follow from "O" in the sense that the sentence represented by "D" follows from 
the sentence represented by "O." 
    Let me begin to modify this austere conception of a code. There is no reason 
why a code symbol might not have parts which, without 
{1}.  Ayer, A.J. Foundations of Empirical Knowledge. London: Macmillan, 1940, and 
"The Terminology of Sense Data" in Philosophical Essays, pp. 66-104. London: 
Macmillan, 1954. Also in Mind, 54, 1945, pp. 289-312. 

136
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
becoming full-fledged symbols on their own, do play a role in the system. 
Thus they might play the role of  mnemonic devices serving to put us in 
mind of features of the sentences represented by the symbols of which they 
are parts. For example, the code symbol for "Someone on board is sick" 
might contain the letter S to remind us of the word "sick," and, perhaps, the 
reversed letter E to remind those of us who have a background in logic of 
the word "someone." Thus, the flag for "Someone on board is sick" might 
be '[reversed E]S.' Now the suggestion at which I am obviously driving is 
that someone might introduce so-called sense-datum sentences as code 
symbols or "flags," and introduce the vocables and printables they contain 
to serve the role of reminding us of certain features of the sentences in 
ordinary perceptual  discourse which the flags  as wholes represent. In 
particular, the role of the vocable or printable "sense datum" would be that 
of indicating that the symbolized sentence contains the context "...looks ...," 
the vocable or printable "red" that the correlated sentence contains the 
context "...looks red..." and so on. 
    9. Now to take this conception of sense-datum 'sentences' seriously is, of 
course, to take seriously the idea that there are no independent logical 
relations between sense-datum 'sentences.' It  looks as though there were 
such independent logical relations, for these 'sentences' look like sentences, 
and they have as proper parts vocables or printables which function  in 
ordinary usage as logical words. Certainly if sense-datum talk is a code, it 
is a code which is easily mistaken for a language proper. Let me illustrate. 
At first sight it certainly seems that 
  
A. The tomato presents S with a red sense datum 
entails both 
    B. There are red sense data 
and 
    C. The tomato presents S with a sense datum which has some specific 
shade of red. 
This, however, on the kind of view I am considering, would be a mistake. 
(B)  would  follow  --  even  in  the  inverted  commas  sense  of  'follows' 
appropriate to code symbols -- from (A) only because (B) is the flag for b, 
"Something looks red to somebody,"  which  does follow from a, "The 
tomato looks red to Jones" which is represented in the code by (A). And 
(C) would 'follow' from (A), in spite of appearances, only if (C) were the 
flag for a sentence which follows from a. 
    I shall have more to say about this example in a moment. The point to be 
stressed now is that to carry out this view consistently one must 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
137
deny  to  such  vocables  and  printables  as  "quality,"  "is,"  "red,"  "color," 
"crimson," "determinable," "determinate," "all," "some," "exists," etc., etc., as 
they occur in sense-datum talk, the full-blooded status of their counterparts in 
ordinary usage. They are rather clues which serve to remind us which sense-
datum 'flag' it would be proper to fly along with which other sense-datum 
'flags'. Thus, the vocables which make up the two 'flags' 
   (D) All sense data are red 
and 
   (E) Some sense data are not red 
remind us of the genuine logical incompatibility between, for example, 
   (F) All elephants are grey 
and 
   (G) Some elephants are not grey, 
and serve, therefore, as a clue to the impropriety of flying these two 'flags' 
together. For the sentences they symbolize are, presumably, 
   (d) Everything looks red to everybody 
and 
   (e) There is a color other than red which something looks to somebody to 
have, 
and these are incompatible. 
    But one would have to be cautious in using these clues. Thus, from the fact 
that it is proper to infer 
    (H) Some elephants have a determinate shade of pink 
from 
    (I) Some elephants are pink 
it would clearly be a mistake to infer that the right to fly 
    (K) Some sense data are pink 
carries with it the right to fly 
    (L) Some sense data have a determinate shade of pink. 
    9. But if sense-datum sentences are really sense-datum 'sentences' -- i.e. code 
flags  --  it  follows,  of  course,  that  sense-datum talk  neither  clarifies nor 
explains facts of the form x looks f to S or x is f. That it would appear to do so 
would be because it would take an almost superhuman effort to keep from 
taking the vocables and printables 

138
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
which occur in the code (and let me now add to our earlier list the vocable 
"directly known") to be words which, if homonyms of words in ordinary 
usage, have their ordinary sense, and which, if invented, have a meaning 
specified by their relation to the others. One would be constantly tempted, 
that is, to treat sense-datum flags as though they were sentences in a theory, 
and sense-datum talk as a  language which gets its use by coordinating 
sense-datum  sentences  with  sentences  in  ordinary  perception  talk,  as 
molecule talk gets its use by coordinating sentences about populations of 
molecules with talk about the pressure of gases on the walls of their 
containers. After all, 
(x looks red to S)  ≡ (there is a class of red sense data which belong to x, 
and are sensed by S)
has at least a superficial resemblance to
(g exerts pressure on w) ≡ (there is a class of molecules which make up g, 
and which are bouncing off w)
a resemblance which becomes even more striking once it is granted that the 
former is not an analysis of x looks red to S in terms of sense-data. 
    There is, therefore, reason to believe that it is the fact that both codes 
and theories are contrived systems which are under the control of the 
language with which they are coordinated, which has given aid and comfort 
to  the  idea  that  sense-datum  talk  is  "another  language"  for  ordinary 
discourse about perception. Yet although the logical relations between 
sentences in a theoretical language are, in an important sense, under the 
control of logical relations between sentences in the observation language, 
nevertheless, within the framework of this control, the theoretical language 
has an autonomy which contradicts the very idea of a code. If this essential 
difference between theories and codes is overlooked, one may be tempted 
to try to eat his cake and have it. By thinking of sense-datum talk as merely 
another language, one draws on the fact that codes have no surplus value. 
By  thinking  of  sense-datum  talk  as  illuminating the  "language  of 
appearing"  one  draws  on  the  fact  that  theoretic  languages,  though 
contrived, and depending for their meaningfulness on a coordination with 
the language of observation, have an explanatory function. Unfortunately, 
these two characteristics are incompatible; for it is just because theories 
have "surplus value" that they can provide explanations. 
    No one, of course, who thinks -- as, for example, does Ayer -- of the 
existence of sense data as entailing the existence of "direct knowledge," 
would wish to say that sense data are theoretical entities. It could 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
139
scarcely be a theoretical fact that I am directly knowing that a certain sense 
content is red. On the other hand, the idea that sense contents are theoretical 
entities  is  not  obviously absurd  --  so  absurd  as  to  preclude  the  above 
interpretation of the plausibility of the "another-language" approach. For even 
those who introduce the expression "sense content" by means of the context 
"...is directly known to be..." may fail to keep this fact in mind when putting 
this expression to use -- for example, by developing the idea that physical 
objects and persons alike are patterns of sense contents. In such a specific 
context,  it  is  possible  to  forget  that  sense  contents,  thus  introduced,  are 
essentially sense data and not merely items which exemplify sense qualities. 
Indeed, one may even lapse into thinking of the sensing of sense contents, the 
givenness of sense data, as non-epistemic facts. 
    I  think  it  fair  to  say  that  those  who  offer  the  "another-  language" 
interpretation of sense data find the illumination it provides to consist primarily 
in the fact that in the language of sense data, physical objects are patterns of 
sense contents, so that, viewed in this framework, there is no "iron curtain" 
between the knowing mind and the physical world. It is to elaborating plausible 
(if schematic) translations of physical- object statements into statements about 
sense contents, rather than to spelling out the force of such sentences as "Sense 
content  s is  directly  known  to  be  red,"  that  the  greater  part  of  their 
philosophical ingenuity has been directed. 
    However this may be, one thing can be said with confidence. If the language 
of sense data were merely a code, a notational device, then the cash value of 
any philosophical  clarification  it  might provide  must lie  in its  ability to 
illuminate logical relations  within ordinary discourse about physical objects 
and our perception of them. Thus, the fact (if it were a fact) that a code can be 
constructed  for  ordinary perception  talk  which  'speaks' of  a  "relation  of 
identity" between the components ("sense data") of "minds" and of "things," 
would presumably have as its cash value the insight that ordinary discourse 
about physical objects and perceivers could (in principle) be constructed from 
sentences of the form "There looks to be a physical object with a red and 
triangular facing surface over there" (the counterpart in ordinary language of 
the basic expressions of the code). In more traditional terms, the clarification 
would consist in making manifest the fact that persons and things are alike 
logical constructions out of lookings or appearings (not appearances!). But any 
claim to this effect soon  runs into  insuperable  difficulties which become 
apparent once the role of "looks" or "appears" is understood. And it is to an 
examination of this role that I now turn. 

140
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
III. THE LOGIC OF 'LOOKS'
10. Before turning aside to examine the suggestion that the language of 
sense data is "another language" for the situations described by the so-
called "language of appearing," I had concluded that classical sense datum 
theories, when pressed, reveal themselves to be the result of a mismating of 
two ideas: (1) The idea that there are certain "inner episodes," e.g. the 
sensation of a red triangle or of a C# sound, which occur to human beings 
and brutes without any prior process of learning or concept formation, and 
without which it would -- in  some sense -- be impossible to see, for 
example, that the facing surface of a physical object is red and triangular, 
or  hear that a certain physical sound is C#. (2) The idea that there are 
certain "inner episodes" which are the non-inferential knowings that, for 
example, a certain item is red and triangular, or, in the case of sounds, C#, 
which inner episodes are the necessary conditions of empirical knowledge 
as providing the evidence for  all  other empirical  propositions.  If  this 
diagnosis is correct, a reasonable next step would be to examine these two 
ideas and determine how that which survives criticism in each is properly 
to be combined with the other. Clearly we would have to come to grips 
with the idea of inner episodes, for this is common to both. 
    Many who attack the idea of the given seem to have thought that the 
central mistake embedded in this idea is exactly the idea that there are inner 
episodes, whether thoughts or so-called "immediate experiences," to which 
each of us has privileged access. I shall argue that this is just not so, and 
that the Myth of the Given can be dispelled without resorting to the crude 
verificationisms or operationalisms characteristic of the more dogmatic 
forms of recent empiricism. Then there are those who, while they do not 
reject the idea of inner episodes, find the Myth of the Given to consist in 
the idea that knowledge of these episodes furnishes  premises on which 
empirical knowledge rests as on a foundation. But while this idea has, 
indeed,  been  the  most  widespread  form  of  the  Myth,  it  is  far  from 
constituting its essence. Everything hinges on why these philosophers reject 
it. If, for example, it is on the ground that the learning of a language is a 
public process  which proceeds  in  a  domain  of  public objects  and  is 
governed by public sanctions, so that private episodes -- with the exception 
of a mysterious nod in their direction -- must needs escape the net of 
rational discourse, then, while these philosophers are immune to the form 
of the myth which has flowered in sense-datum theories, they have no 
defense against the myth in the form of the givenness of such facts as that 
physical object x looks red to person S at time t, or that  there looks to 
person S at time t to be a red physical 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
141
object over there. It will be useful to pursue the Myth in this direction for a 
while before more general issues are raised. 
    11. Philosophers have found it easy to suppose that such a sentence as "The 
tomato looks red to Jones" says that a certain triadic relation,  looking or 
appearing, obtains among a physical object, a person, and a quality.{2} "A 
looks f to S" is assimilated to "x gives y to z" -- or, better, since giving is, 
strictly speaking, an action rather than a relation -- to "x is between y and z," 
and taken to be a case of the general form "R(x,y,z)." Having supposed this, 
they turn without further ado to the question, "Is this relation analyzable?" 
Sense-datum theorists have, on the whole, answered "Yes," and claimed that 
facts of the form x looks red to X are to be analyzed in terms of sense data. 
Some of them, without necessarily rejecting this claim, have argued that facts 
of this kind are, at the very least, to be explained in terms of sense data. Thus, 
when Broad{3} writes "If, in fact, nothing elliptical is before my mind, it is 
very hard to understand why the penny should seem elliptical rather than of 
any other  shape  (p.  240),"  he is  appealing  to  sense-data  as  a  means of 
explaining facts of this form. The difference, of course, is that whereas if x 
looks f to S is correctly analyzed in terms of sense data, then no one could 
believe that x looks f to S without believing that S has sense data, the same 
need not be true if x looks f to S is explained in terms of sense data, for, in the 
case of some types of explanation, at least, one can believe a fact without 
believing its explanation. 
    On the other hand, those philosophers who reject sense-datum theories in 
favor of so-called theories of appearing have characteristically held that facts 
of the form x looks f to S are ultimate and irreducible, and that sense data are 
needed neither for their analysis nor for their explanation. If asked, "Doesn't 
the statement 'x looks red to S' have as part of its meaning the idea that S 
stands in some relation to something that  is red?"  their answer is in the 
negative, and, I believe, rightly so. 
    12. I shall begin my examination of "X looks red to S at t" with the simple 
but fundamental point that the sense of "red" in which things look red is, on the 
face of it, the same as that in which things  are red. When one glimpses an 
object and decides that it looks red (to  me,  now, from here) and wonders 
whether it really is red, one is surely wondering whether the color -- red -- 
which it looks to have is the one it really does have. This point can be obscured 
by such verbal 
{2} A useful discussion of views of this type is to be found in Roderick Chisholm's 
"The Theory of Appearing," in Max Black (ed.), Philosophical Analysis, pp. 102-
18. Ithaca: Cornell Univ. Press, 1950 and in H.H. Price's  Perception. London: 
Methuen, 1932. 
{3} Broad, C.D., Scientific Thought, London: Kegan Paul, 1923. 

142
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
manipulations as hyphenating the words "looks" and "red" and claiming 
that it is the insoluble unit "looks-red" and not just "looks" which is the 
relation. Insofar as this dodge is based on insight, it is insight into the fact 
that  looks is not a relation between a person, a thing, and a quality. 
Unfortunately, as we shall see, the reason for this fact is one which gives no 
comfort at all to the idea that it is looks-red rather than looks which is the 
relation. 
    I have, in effect, been claiming that  being red is logically prior, is a 
logically simpler notion, than  looking red; the function "x is red" to "x 
looks red to y." In short, that it just won't do to say that  x is red is 
analyzable in terms of x looks red to y. But what, then, are we to make of 
the necessary truth -- and it is, of course, a necessary truth -- that
(x  is  red)   ≡  (x  would  look  red  to  standard  observers  in  standard 
conditions)?
There is certainly some sense to the idea that this is at least the schema for 
a definition of physical redness in terms of looking red. One begins to see 
the plausibility of the gambit that looking-red is an insoluble unity, for the 
minute one gives "red" (on the right-hand side) an independent status, it 
becomes what it obviously is, namely "red" as a predicate of physical 
objects, and the supposed definition becomes an obvious circle. 
    13. The way out of this troubling situation has two parts. The second is 
to show how "x is red" can be necessarily equivalent to "x would look red 
to standard observers in standard situations" without this being a definition 
of "x is red" in terms of "x looks red." But the first, and logically prior, step 
is to show that "x looks red to S" does not assert either an unanalyzable 
triadic relation to obtain between x, red, and S, or an unanalyzable dyadic 
relation to obtain between x and S. Not, however, because it asserts an 
analyzable relation to obtain, but because looks is not a relation at all. Or, 
to put the matter in a familiar way, one can say that looks is a relation if he 
likes, for the sentences in which this word appears show some grammatical 
analogy to sentences built around words which we should not hesitate to 
classify as relation words; but once one has become aware of certain other 
features which make them very unlike ordinary relation sentences, he will 
be less inclined to view his task as that of  finding the answer to the 
question "Is looks a relation?" 
    14. To bring out the essential features of the use of "looks," I shall 
engage in a little historical fiction. A young man, whom I shall call John, 
works in a necktie shop. He has learned the use of color words in the usual 
way, with this exception. I shall suppose that he has never looked at an 
object in other than standard conditions. As he examines 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
143
his stock every evening before closing up shop, he says, "This is red," "That is 
green," "This is purple," etc., and such of his linguistic peers as happen to be 
present nod their heads approvingly. 
    Let us suppose, now, that at this point in the story, electric lighting is 
invented.  His  friends  and  neighbors  rapidly  adopt  this  new  means  of 
illumination, and wrestle with the problems it presents. John, however, is the 
last  to  succumb.  Just after  it has been installed  in  his shop,  one of his 
neighbors, Jim, comes in to buy a necktie. 
"Here is a handsome green one," says John. 
"But it isn't green," says Jim, and takes John outside. 
"Well," says John, "it was green in there, but now it is blue." 
"No," says Jim, "you know that neckties don't change their color merely as a 
result of being taken from place to place." 
"But perhaps electricity changes their color and they change back again in 
daylight?" 
"That would be a queer kind of change, wouldn't it?" says Jim. 
"I suppose so," says bewildered John. "But we saw that it was green in there." 
No, we didn't see that it was green in there, because it wasn't green, and you 
can't see what isn't so!" 
"Well, this is a pretty pickle," says John. "I just don't know what to say."  
The next time John picks up this tie in his shop and someone asks what color it 
is, his first impulse is to say "It is green." He suppresses this impulse, and 
remembering what happened before, comes out with "It is blue." He doesn't 
see that it is blue, nor would he say that he sees it to be blue. What does he 
see? Let us ask him. 
 I don't know  what to say. If I didn't know that the tie is blue -- and the 
alternative to granting this is odd indeed -- I would swear that I was seeing a 
green tie and seeing that it is green. It is as though I were seeing the necktie to 
be green." 
If we bear in mind that such sentences as "This is green" have both a fact-
stating and a reporting use, we can put the point I have just been making by 
saying that once John learns to stifle the report "This necktie is green" when 
looking at it in the shop, there is no other report about color and the necktie 
which he knows how to make. To be sure, he now says "This necktie is blue." 
But he is not making a  reporting use of this sentence. He uses it as the 
conclusion of an inference..{4} 
{4} (Added 1963) When John has mastered looks talk he will be able to say not only 
"The tie looks green" but "The tie looks to be blue," where the latter has the sense 
of "...looks as blue ties look in these circumstances." The distinction between 
"looks ø" and "looks to be ø" corresponds to Chisholm's distinction between non-
comparative and comparative "appears" -- statements. 

144
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
 
    15. We return to the shop after an interval, and we find that when John is 
asked "What is the color of this necktie?" he makes such statements as "It 
looks green, but take it outside and see." It occurs to us that perhaps in 
learning to say "This tie looks green" when in the shop, he has learned to 
make a new kind of report. Thus, it might seem as though his linguistic 
peers have helped him to notice a new kind of objective fact, one which, 
though a relational fact involving a perceiver, is as logically independent of 
the beliefs, the conceptual framework of the perceiver, as the fact that the 
necktie is blue; but a minimal fact, one which it is safer to report because 
one is less likely to be mistaken. Such a minimal fact would be the fact that 
the necktie looks green to John on a certain occasion, and it would be 
properly reported by using the sentence "This necktie  looks green." It is 
this type of account, of course, which I have already rejected. 
    But what is the alternative? If, that is, we are not going to adopt the 
sense-datum analysis. Let me begin by noting that there certainly seems to 
be something to the idea that the sentence "This looks green to me now" 
has a reporting role. Indeed, it would seem to be essentially a report. But if 
so, what does it report, if not a minimal objective fact, and if what it reports 
is not to be analyzed in terms of sense data? 
    16. Let me next call attention to the fact that the experience of having 
something look green to one at a certain time is,  insofar  as it is an 
experience, obviously very much like that of seeing something to be green, 
insofar as the latter is an experience. But the latter, of course, is not just an 
experience. And this is the heart of the matter. For to say that a certain 
experience is a  seeing that something is the case, is to do more than 
describe the experience. It is to characterize it as, so to speak, making an 
assertion or claim, and -- which is the point I wish to stress -- to endorse 
that claim. As a matter of fact, as we shall see, it is much more easy to see 
that  the  statement  "Jones  sees  that  the  tree  is  green"  ascribes  a 
propositional claim to Jones' experience and endorses it, than to specify 
how the statement describes Jones' experience. 
    I realize that by speaking of experiences as containing propositional 
claims. I may seem to be knocking at closed doors. I ask the reader to bear 
with me, however, as the justification of this way of talking is one of my 
major aims. If I am permitted to issue this verbal currency now, I hope to 
put it on the gold standard before concluding the argument. 
    16. It is clear that the experience of seeing that something is green is not 
merely the occurrence of the propositional claim 'this is green' -- not even if 
we add, as we must, that this claim is, so to speak, evoked or wrung from 
the perceiver by the object perceived. Here Nature -- to turn Kant's simile 
(which he uses in another context) on 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
145
its head -- puts  us to  the question.  The  something more is clearly what 
philosophers  have  in  mind  when  they  speak  of  "visual  impressions"  or 
"immediate visual experiences." What exactly is the logical status of these 
"impressions" or "immediate experiences" is a problem which will be with us 
for the remainder of this argument. For the moment it is the propositional claim 
which concerns us. 
    I pointed out above that when we use the word "see" as in "S sees that the 
tree  is  green"  we are  not  only ascribing  a  claim to  the  experience,  but 
endorsing it. It is this endorsement which Ryle has in mind when he refers to 
seeing that something is thus and so as an achievement, and to "sees" as an 
achievement word. I prefer to call it a "so it is" or "just so" word, for the root 
idea is that of truth. To characterize S's experience as a seeing is, in a suitably 
broad  sense  --  which  I  shall  be  concerned  to  explicate  --  to  apply  the 
semantical concept of truth to that experience. 
    Now the suggestion I wish to make is, in its simplest terms, that the 
statement "X looks green to Jones" differs from "Jones sees that x is green" in 
that whereas the latter both ascribes a propositional claim to Jones' experience 
and endorses it, the former ascribes the claim but does not endorse it. This is 
the essential difference between the two, for it is clear that two experiences 
may be identical  as experiences, and yet one be properly referred to as a 
seeing that something is green, and the other merely as a case of something's 
looking green. Of course, if I say "X merely looks green to S" I am not only 
failing to endorse the claim, I am rejecting it. 
    Thus, when I say "X looks green to me now" I am reporting the fact that my 
experience is, so to speak, intrinsically,  as an experience, indistinguishable 
from a veridical one of seeing that x is green. Involved in the report is the 
ascription to my experience of the claim 'x is green'; and the fact that I make 
this report rather than the simple report "X is green" indicates that certain 
considerations have operated to raise, so to speak in a higher court, the 
question 'to endorse or not to endorse.' I may have reason to think that x may 
not after all be green. 
    If I make at one time the report "X looks to be green" -- which is not only a 
report, but the withholding of an endorsement -- I may later, when the original 
reasons for withholding endorsement have been rebutted, endorse the original 
claim by saying "I saw that it was green, though at the time I was only sure that 
it looked green." Notice that I will only say "I see that x is green" (as opposed 
to "X is green") when the question "to endorse or not to endorse" has come up. 
"I see that x is green" belongs, so to speak, on the same level as "X looks 
green" and "X merely looks green." 
    17. There are many interesting and subtle questions about the 

146
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
dialectics of "looks talk," into which I do not have the space to enter. 
Fortunately, the above distinctions suffice for our present purposes. Let us 
suppose, then, that to say that "X looks green to S at t" is, in effect, to say 
that S has that kind of experience which, if one were prepared to endorse 
the propositional claim it involves, one would characterize as seeing x to 
be green at t. Thus, when our friend John learns to use the sentence "This 
necktie looks green to me" he learns a way of reporting an experience of 
the kind which, as far as any categories I have yet permitted him to have 
are concerned, he can only characterize by saying that as an experience it 
does not differ from seeing something to be green, and that evidence for the 
proposition 'This necktie is green' is ipso facto evidence for the proposition 
that the experience in question is seeing that the necktie is green. 
    Now one of the chief merits of this account is that it permits a parallel 
treatment of 'qualitative' and 'existential' seeming or looking. Thus, when I 
say "The tree looks bent" I am endorsing that part of the claim involved in 
my experience which concerns the existence of the tree, but withholding 
endorsement from the rest. On the other hand, when I say "There looks to 
be a bent tree over there" I am refusing to endorse any but the most general 
aspect of the claim, namely, that there is an 'over there' as opposed to a 
'here.' Another merit of the account is that it explains how a necktie, for 
example, can look red to S at t, without looking scarlet or crimson or any 
other determinate shade of red. In short it explains how things can have a 
merely generic look, a fact which would be puzzling indeed if looking red 
were a natural as opposed to [an] epistemic fact about objects. The core of 
the explanation, of course, is that the propositional claim involved in such 
an experience may be, for example, either the more determinable claim 
'This is red' or the more determinate claim 'This is crimson.' The complete 
story is more complicated, and requires some account of the role in these 
experiences of the 'impressions' or  'immediate  experiences' the logical 
status of which remains to be determined. But even in the absence of these 
additional details, we can note the resemblance between the fact that x can 
look red to S, without it being true of some specific shade of red that x 
looks  to S to be  of that  shade, and the fact that  S can believe that 
Cleopatra's Needle  is tall, without its being true of some determinate 
number of feet that S believes it to be that number of feet tall. 
    18. The point I wish to stress at this time, however, is that the concept of 
looking  green,  the  ability  to  recognize  that  something  looks  green, 
presupposes the concept of being green, and that the latter concept involves 
the ability to tell what colors objects have by looking at them -- which, in 
turn, involves knowing in what circumstances to place an object if one 
wishes to ascertain its color by looking at it. 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
147
Let me develop this latter point. As our friend John becomes more and more 
sophisticated about his own and other people's visual experiences, he learns 
under what conditions it is as though one were seeing a necktie to be of one 
color when in fact it is of another. Suppose someone asks him "Why does this 
tie look green to me?" John may very well reply "Because it is blue, and blue 
objects look green in this kind of light." And if someone asks this question 
when looking at the necktie in plain daylight, John may very well reply 
"Because the tie is green" -- to which he may add "We are in plain daylight, 
and in daylight things look what they are." We thus see that
(x is red)  ≡  (x looks red to standard observers in standard conditions)
is a necessary truth not because the right-hand side is the definition of "x is 
red," but because "standard conditions" means condition in which things look 
what they are. And, of course, which conditions are standard for a given mode 
of perception is, at the common-sense level specified by a list of conditions 
which  exhibit  the  vagueness  and  open  texture  characteristic  of  ordinary 
discourse.{5} 
    19. I have arrived at a stage in my argument which is, at least prima facie, 
out of step with the basic presuppositions of logical atomism. Thus, as long as 
looking green is taken to be the notion to which being green is reducible, it 
could be claimed with considerable plausibility that fundamental concepts 
pertaining to observable fact have that logical independence of one another 
which is characteristic of the empiricist tradition. Indeed, at first sight the 
situation is quite disquieting, for if the ability to recognize that x looks green 
presupposes the concept of being green, and if this in turn involves knowing in 
what circumstances to view an object to ascertain its color, then, since one can 
scarcely determine what the circumstances are without noticing that certain 
objects have certain perceptible characteristics -- including colors -- it would 
seem that one couldn't form the concept of  being green, and, by parity of 
reasoning, of the other colors, unless he already had them. 
    Now, it just won't do to reply that to have the concept of green, to know 
what it is for something to be green, it is sufficient to respond when one is in 
point of fact in standard conditions, to green objects with the vocable "This is 
green." Not only must the conditions be of a sort that is appropriate for 
determining the color of an object by 
{5} (Added 1963) Standard circumstances are, indeed, the circumstances in which 
things look as they are. But the non-trivial character of the above formula emerges 
when we replace "standard circumstances" by the mention of a specific kind of 
circumstance (e.g. daylight) and add that daylight is the standard circumstance of 
perception, i.e. the condition in which color words have their primary perceptual 
use. 

148
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
looking, the subject must know that conditions of this sort are appropriate. 
And while this does not imply that one must have concepts before one has 
them, it does imply that one can have the concept of green only by having a 
whole battery of concepts of which it is one element. It implies that while 
the process of acquiring the concept of green may -- indeed does -- involve 
a long history of acquiring piecemeal habits of response to various objects 
in various circumstances, there is an important sense in which one has no 
concept pertaining to the observable properties of physical objects in Space 
and Time unless one has them all -- and, indeed, as we shall see, a great 
deal more besides.{6} 
    20. Now, I think it is clear what a logical atomist, supposing that he 
found any merit at all in the above argument, would say. He would say that 
I am overlooking the fact that the logical space of physical objects in Space 
and Time rests on the logical space of sense contents, and he would argue 
that it is concepts pertaining to sense contents which have the logical 
independence  of  one  another  which  is  characteristic  of  traditional 
empiricism.  "After  all,"  he  would  point  out,  "concepts  pertaining  to 
theoretical entities -- molecules, for example -- have the mutual dependence 
you have, perhaps rightly, ascribed to concepts pertaining to physical fact. 
But,"  he would continue, "theoretical  concepts have empirical  content 
because they rest on -- are coordinated with -- a more fundamental logical 
space. Until you have disposed, therefore, of the idea that there is a more 
fundamental logical space than that of physical objects in Space and Time, 
or shown that it too is fraught with coherence, your incipient Meditations 
Hegeliennes are premature." 
    And we can imagine a sense-datum theorist to interject the following 
complaint: "You have begun to write as though you had shown not only 
that physical redness is not to be analyzed in terms of looking red -- which 
I will grant -- but also that physical redness is not to be analyzed at all, and, 
in particular, not to be analyzed in terms of the redness of red sense 
contents. Again, you have begun to write as though you had shown not only 
that observing that x looks red is not more basic than observing that x is 
red, but also that there is no form of visual noticing more basic than seeing 
that x is red, such as the sensing of a red sense content. I grant," he 
continues, "that the tendency of sense-datum theorists has been to claim 
that the redness of physical objects is to be analyzed in terms of looking 
red, and then to 
{6} (Added 1963) The argument can admit a distinction in principle between a 
rudimentary concept of "green" which could be learned without learning the 
logical space of looks talk, and a richer concept of "green" in which "is green" 
can be challenged by "merely looks green." The essential point is that even to 
have the more rudimentary concept presupposes having a battery of other 
concepts. 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
149
claim that looking red is itself to be analyzed in terms of red sense contents, 
and that you may have undercut this line of analysis. But what is to prevent the 
sense-datum theorist from taking the line that the properties of physical objects 
are  directly analyzable into the qualities and phenomenal relations of sense 
contents?" 
    Very well. But once again we must ask, How does the sense-datum theorist 
come by the framework of sense contents? and How is he going to convince us 
that there are such things? For even if  looking red doesn't enter into the 
analysis of physical redness, it is by asking us to reflect on the experience of 
having something look  red  to  us that  he hopes to  make this  framework 
convincing. And it therefore becomes relevant to note that my analysis of x 
looks red to S at t has not, at least as far as I have pushed it to date, revealed 
any such items as sense-contents. And it may be relevant to suggest that once 
we see clearly that physical redness is not to be given a dispositional analysis 
in terms of looking red, the idea that it is to be given any kind of dispositional 
analysis loses a large measure of its plausibility. In any event, the next move 
must be to  press further the above  account of qualitative and existential 
looking. 
IV. EXPLAINING LOOKS
21.  I have already noted that sense-datum theorists are impressed by the 
question "How can a physical object look red to S, unless something in that 
situation is red and S is taking account of it? If S isn't experiencing something 
red, how does it happen that the physical object looks red, rather than green or 
streaky?" There is, I propose to show, something to this line of thought, though 
the story turns out to be a complicated one. And if, in the course of telling the 
story, I shall be led to make statements which resemble  some of the things 
sense-datum theorists have said, this story will amount to a sense-datum theory 
only in a sense which robs this phrase of an entire dimension of its traditional 
epistemological  force,  a  dimension  which  is  characteristic  of  even  such 
heterodox forms of sense-datum theory as the "another language" approach. 
    Let me begin by formulating the question: "Is the fact that an object looks to 
S to be red and triangular, or that there looks to S to be a red and triangular 
object over there,  to be explained in terms of the idea that Jones has a 
sensation -- or impression, or immediate experience -- of a red triangle? One 
point  can  be  made  right  away, namely that  if  these  expressions  are  so 
understood that, say, the immediate experience of a red triangle implies the 
existence of something -- not a physical object -- which is red and triangular, 
and if the redness which this item has is the same as the redness which the 
physical object looks 

150
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
to have, then the suggestion runs up against the objection that the redness 
physical objects look to have is the same as the redness physical objects 
actually do have, so that items which ex hypothesi are not physical objects, 
and which radically, even categorially, differ from physical objects, would 
have the same redness as physical object. And while this is, perhaps, not 
entirely out of the question, it certainly provides food for thought. Yet 
when it is claimed that "obviously" physical objects can't look red to one 
unless one is experiencing something that is red, is it not presumed that the 
redness which the something has is the redness which the physical object 
looks to have? 
    Now there are those who would say that the question "Is the fact that an 
object looks red and triangular to S to be explained -- as opposed to 
notationally reformulated -- in terms of the idea that S has an impression of 
a red triangle?" simply doesn't arise, on the ground that there are perfectly 
sound explanations of qualitative and existential lookings which make no 
reference to 'immediate experiences' or other dubious entities. Thus, it is 
pointed out, it is perfectly proper to answer the question "Why does this 
object look red?" by saying "Because it is an orange object looked at in 
such and such circumstances." The explanation is, in principle, a good one, 
and is typical of the answers we make to such questions in everyday life. 
But because these explanations are good, it by no means follows that 
explanations of other kinds might not be equally good, and, perhaps, more 
searching. 
    22. On the face of it there are at least two ways in which additional, but 
equally legitimate explanations might be forthcoming for such a fact as that 
x looks red. The first of these is suggested by a simple analogy. Might it not 
be the case that just as there are two kinds of good explanation of the fact 
that this balloon has expanded, (a) in terms of the Boyle-Charles laws 
which relate the empirical concepts of volume, pressure, and temperature 
pertaining to gases, and (b) in terms of the kinetic theory of gases; so there 
are two ways of explaining the fact that this object looks red to S: (a) in 
terms  of  empirical  generalizations  relating  the  colors  of  objects,  the 
circumstances in which they are seen, and the colors they look to have, and 
(b) in terms of a theory of perception in which 'immediate experiences' play 
a role analogous to that of the molecules of the kinetic theory. 
    Now there  is  such  an  air  of  paradox  to  the  idea  that  'immediate 
experiences' are  mere theoretical entities -- entities, that is, which are 
postulated, along with certain fundamental principles concerning them, to 
explain uniformities pertaining to sense perception, as molecules, along 
with the principles of molecular motion, are postulated  to explain the 
experimentally determined regularities pertaining 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
151
to gases -- that I am going to lay it aside until a more propitious context of 
thought may make it seem relevant. Certainly, those who have thought that 
qualitative and existential lookings are to be explained in terms of 'immediate 
experiences' thought of the latter as the most untheoretical of entities, indeed, 
as the observables par excellence. 
    Let us therefore turn to a second way in which, at least prima facie, there 
might be an additional, but equally legitimate explanation of existential and 
qualitative lookings. According to this second account, when we consider 
items of this kind, we find that they contain as components items which are 
properly referred  to as,  for example,  'the immediate  experience of a red 
triangle.' Let us begin our exploration of this suggestion by taking another look 
at our account of existential and qualitative lookings. It will be remembered 
that our account of qualitative looking ran, in rough and ready terms, as 
follows: 
'x looks red to S' has the sense of 'S has an experience which involves in a 
unique way the idea that x is red and involves it in such a way that if this idea 
were true,{7} the experience would correctly be characterized as a seeing that x 
is red.' 
Thus, our account implies that the three situations 
(a)  Seeing that x, over there, is red
 
(b)  Its looking to one that x, over there, is red
 
 
 
(c)  Its looking to one as though there were a red object over there
differ primarily in that (a) is so formulated as to involve an endorsement of the 
idea that x, over there, is red,  whereas in (b)  this idea is only partially 
endorsed, and in (c) not at all. Let us refer to the idea that x, over there, is red 
as the  common propositional content of these three situations. (This is, of 
course, not strictly correct, since the propositional content of (c) is existential, 
rather than about a presupposedly designated object x, but it will serve my 
purpose.  Furthermore,  the  common  propositional  content  of  these  three 
experiences is much more complex and determinate than is indicated by the 
sentence we use to describe our experience to others, and which I am using to 
represent  it.  Nevertheless  it  is  clear  that,  subject  to  the  first  of  these 
qualifications, the propositional content of these three experiences  could be 
identical.) 
    The propositional content of these three experiences is, of course, a part of 
that to which we are logically committed by characterizing them as situations 
of these three kinds. Of the remainder, as we have seen, part is a matter of the 
extent to which this propositional content is endorsed. It is the residue with 
which we are now concerned. Let us call this residue the descriptive content. I 
can then point 
{7} (Added 1963)...and if S knew that the circumstances were normal. 

152
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
out that it is implied by my account that not only the propositional content, 
but also the descriptive content of these three experiences may be identical. 
I shall suppose this to be the case, though that there must be some factual 
difference in the total situations is obvious. 
    Now,  and  this  is  the  decisive  point,  in  characterizing  these  three 
experiences as, respectively, a seeing that x, over there, is red, its looking 
to one as though x, over there, were red, and its looking to one as though 
there were a  red object  over there,  we do  not  specify this common 
descriptive content  save  indirectly,  by  implying  that  if  the  common 
propositional content were true,{8} then all these three situations would be 
cases of seeing that x, over there, is red. Both existential and qualitative 
lookings  are  experiences  that  would  be  seeings if  their  propositional 
contents were true. 
    Thus, the very nature of "looks talk" is such as to raise questions to 
which it gives no answer: What is the intrinsic character of the common 
descriptive content of these three experiences? and How are they able to 
have it in spite of the fact that whereas in the case of (a) the perceiver must 
be in the presence of a red object over there, in (b) the object over there 
need not be red, while in (c) there need be no object over there at all? 
    23. Now it is clear that if we were required to give a more direct 
characterization of the common descriptive content of these experiences, 
we would begin by trying to do so in terms of the quality red. Yet, as I have 
already pointed out, we can scarcely say that this descriptive content is 
itself something red unless we can pry the term "red" loose from its prima-
facie tie with the category of physical objects. And there is a line of thought 
which has been one of the standard gambits of perceptual epistemology and 
which seems to promise exactly this. If successful, it would convince us 
that redness -- in the most basic sense of this term -- is a characteristic of 
items of the sort we have been calling sense contents. It runs as follows: 
While it would, indeed, be a howler to say that we don't see chairs, tables, 
etc., but only their facing surfaces, nevertheless, although we see a table, 
say, and although the table has a back as well as a front, we do not see the 
back of the table as we see its front. Again, although we see the table, and 
although the table has an 'inside,' we do not see the inside of the table as we 
see its facing outside. Seeing an object entails seeing its facing surface. If 
we are seeing that an object is red, this entails seeing that its facing surface 
is red. A red surface is a two-dimensional red expanse -- two-dimensional 
in that though it may be bulgy, and in this sense three-dimensional, it has 
no  thickness.  As  far  as  the  analysis  of  perceptual  consciousness  is 
concerned, a red physical object is one that has a red expanse as its surface.
{8} (Added 1963)...and if the subject knew that the circumstances were normal. 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
153
Now a red expanse is not a physical object, nor does the existence of a red 
expanse entail the existence of a physical object to which it belongs. (Indeed, 
there are "wild" expanses which do not belong to any physical object.) The 
"descriptive  content"  --  as  you  put  it  --  which  is  common  to  the  three 
experiences (a), (b) and (c) above, is exactly this sort of thing, a bulgy red 
expanse. 
    Spelled out thus baldly, the fallacy is, or should be, obvious; it is a simple 
equivocation on the phrase "having a red surface." We start out by thinking of 
the familiar fact that a physical object may be of one color "on the surface" and 
of another color "inside." We may express this by saving that, for example, the 
'surface' of the object is red. but its 'inside' green. But in saying this we are not 
saying that  there  is  a  'surface' in  the  sense  of  a  bulgy two-dimensional 
particular, a red 'expanse' which is a component particular in a complex 
particular which also includes green particulars. The notion of two-dimensional 
bulgy (or flat) particulars is a product of philosophical (and mathematical) 
sophistication which can be related to our ordinary conceptual framework, but 
does not belong in an analysis of it. I think that in its place it has an important 
contribution to make. (See below, Section 61, (5)) But this place is in the 
logical space of an ideal scientific picture of the world and not in the logical 
space of ordinary discourse. It has nothing to do with the logical grammar of 
our ordinary color words. It is just a mistake to suppose that as the word "red" 
is actually used, it is ever surfaces in the sense of two-dimensional particulars 
which are red. The only particular involved when a physical object is "red on 
the outside, but green inside" is the physical object itself, located in a certain 
region  of  Space  and  enduring over  a  stretch  of  Time.  The  fundamental 
grammar of the attribute red is physical object x is red at place p and at time t. 
Certainly, when we say of an object that it is red, we commit ourselves to no 
more than that it is red "at the surface." And sometimes it is red at the surface 
by having what we would not hesitate to call a "part" which is red through and 
through -- thus, a red table which is red by virtue of a layer of red paint. But 
the red paint is not itself red by virtue of a component -- a 'surface' or 'expanse'; 
a particular with no thickness -- which is red. There may, let me repeat, turn 
out to be some place in the total philosophical picture for the statement that 
there "really are" such particulars, and that they are elements in perceptual 
experience. But this place is not to be found by an analysis of ordinary 
perceptual discourse, any more than Minkowski four-dimensional Space-Time 
worms are an analysis of what we mean when we speak of physical objects in 
Space and Time. 

154
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
V. IMPRESSIONS AND IDEAS: A LOGICAL POINT
24. Let me return to beating the neighboring bushes. Notice that a common 
descriptive component of the three experiences I am considering is itself 
often referred to (by philosophers, at least) as an  experience -- as, for 
example,  an  immediate  experience.  Here  caution  is  necessary.  The 
notorious "ing-ed" ambiguity of "experience" must be kept in mind. For 
although seeing that x, over there, is red is an experiencing -- indeed, a 
paradigm case of experiencing -- it does not follow that the descriptive 
content of this experiencing is itself an experiencing. Furthermore, because 
the fact that x, over there, looks to Jones to be red would be a seeing, on 
Jones' part, that x, over there, is red, if its propositional content were true, 
and because if it  were a seeing, it  would be an experiencing, we must 
beware of concluding that the fact that x, over there, looks red to Jones is 
itself an experiencing. Certainly, the fact that something looks red to me 
can itself be experienced. But it is not itself an experiencing. 
    All this is not to say that the common descriptive core may not turn out 
to be an experiencing,{9} though the chances that this is so appear less 
with each step in my argument. On the other hand, I can say that it is a 
component in states of affairs which are experienced, and it does not seem 
unreasonable  to  say  that  it  is  itself  experienced.  But  what  kind  of 
experience (in the sense of experienced) is it? If my argument to date is 
sound, I cannot say that it is a red experience, that is, a red experienced 
item. I could, of course, introduce a new use of "red" according to which to 
say of an 'immediate experience' that it was red, would be the stipulated 
equivalent  of  characterizing  it  as  that  which  could  be  the  common 
descriptive  component  of  a  seeing that  something  is  red,  and  the 
corresponding qualitative and existential  lookings. This would give us a 
predicate by which to describe and report the experience, but we should, of 
course, be only verbally better off than if we could only refer to this kind of 
experience as the kind which could be the common descriptive component 
of a seeing and a qualitative or existential looking. And this makes it clear 
that one way of putting what we are after is by saying that we want to have 
a  name for this kind of experience which is truly a  name, and not just 
shorthand for a definite description. Does ordinary usage have a name for 
this kind of experience? 
    I shall return to this quest in a moment. In the meantime it is important to 
clear the way of a traditional obstacle to understanding 
{9}  (Added  1963)  The term "experiencing" in  the  question  "Is  the  common 
descriptive component an experiencing?" is used in an epistemic sense. In the 
non-epistemic sense of an "undergoing," the common descriptive component is, 
of course, an experiencing. 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
155
the status of such things as sensations of red triangles. Thus, suppose I were to 
say that while the experience I am examining is not a red experience, it is an 
experience of red. I could expect the immediate challenge: "Is 'sensation of a 
red triangle' any better off than 'red and triangular experience'? Does not the 
existence of a sensation of a red triangle entail the existence of a red and 
triangular item, and hence, always on the assumption that red is a property of 
physical  objects,  of a  red  and triangular  physical object?  Must you not, 
therefore abandon this assumption, and  return to the framework of sense 
contents which you have so far refused to do?" 
    One way out of [this] dilemma would be to assimilate "Jones has a sensation 
of a red triangle" to "Jones believes in a divine Huntress." For the truth of the 
latter does not, of course, entail the existence of a divine Huntress. Now, I 
think that most contemporary philosophers are clear that it is possible to 
attribute to the context 
...sensation of...
the logical property of being such that "There is a sensation of a red triangle" 
does not entail "There is a red triangle" without assimilating the context 
"...sensation of..." to the context "...believes in..." in any closer way. For while 
mentalistic verbs characteristically provide nonextensional contexts (when they 
are not "achievement" or "endorsing" words), not all nonextensional contexts 
are mentalistic. Thus, as far as the purely logical point is concerned, there is no 
reason why "Jones has a sensation of a red triangle" should be assimilated to 
"Jones believes in a divine Huntress" rather than to "It is possible that the 
moon is made of green cheese" or to any of the other nonextensional contexts 
familiar to logicians. Indeed there is no reason why it should be assimilated to 
any of these. "...sensation of..." or "...impression of..." could be a context 
which,  though  sharing  with  these  others  the  logical  property  of 
nonextensionality, was otherwise in a class by itself. 
    25. Yet there is no doubt but that historically the contexts "...sensation of..." 
and  "...impression  of..."  were assimilated  to  such  mentalistic  contexts  as 
"...believes...,"  "...desires...,"  "...chooses...,"  in short to contexts which are 
either themselves 'propositional attitudes' or involve propositional attitudes in 
their analysis. This assimilation took the form of classifying sensations with 
ideas or thoughts. Thus Descartes uses the word "thought" to cover not only 
judgments, inferences, desires, volitions, and (occurrent)  ideas of abstract 
qualities, but also sensations, feelings, and images. Locke, in the same spirit, 
uses the term "idea" with similar scope. The apparatus of Conceptualism, 
which  had  its  genesis  in  the  controversy  over  universals,  was  given  a 
correspondingly wide application. Just as 

156
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
objects and situations were said to have 'objective being' in our thoughts, 
when we think of them, or judge them to obtain -- as contrasted with the 
'subjective' or 'formal being' which they have in the world -- so, when we 
have a sensation of a red triangle, the red triangle was supposed to have 
'objective being' in our sensation. 
    In  elaborating,  for  a  moment,  this  conceptualistic  interpretation  of 
sensation, let me refer to that which has 'objective being' in a thought or 
idea as its content or immanent object. Then I can say that the fundamental 
difference between occurrent abstract ideas and sensations, for both Locke 
and Descartes, lay in the specificity and, above all, the complexity of the 
content of the latter. (Indeed, both Descartes and Locke assimilated the 
contrast between the simple and the complex in ideas to that between the 
generic  and  the  specific.)  Descartes  thinks  of  sensations  as  confused 
thoughts of their external cause; Spinoza of sensations and images as 
confused thoughts of bodily states, and still more confused thoughts of the 
external causes of these bodily states. And it is interesting to note that the 
conceptualistic thesis that abstract entities have only esse intentionale (their 
esse is concipi) is extended by Descartes and, with less awareness of what 
he is doing, Locke, to include the thesis that colors, sounds, etc., exist "only 
in the mind" (their esse is percipi) and by Berkeley to cover all perceptible 
qualities. 
    Now, I  think  we would  all  agree,  today, that  this  assimilation  of 
sensations to thoughts is a mistake. It is sufficient to note that if "sensation 
of a red triangle" had the sense of "episode of the kind which is the 
common descriptive component of those experiences which would be cases 
of seeing that the facing surface of a physical object is red and triangular if 
an object were presenting a red and triangular facing surface" then it would 
have the nonextensionality the noticing of which led  to  this mistaken 
assimilation. But while we have indeed escaped from this blind alley, it is 
small consolation. For we are no further along in the search for a 'direct' or 
'intrinsic' characterization of 'immediate experience.' 
VI. IMPRESSIONS AND IDEAS: AN HISTORICAL POINT
26. There are those who will say that although I have spoken of exploring 
blind alleys, it is really I who am blind. For, they will say, if that which we 
wish to characterize intrinsically is an  experience, then there  can be no 
puzzle about knowing what kind of experience it is, though there may be a 
problem about how this knowledge is to be communicated to others. And, 
indeed, it is tempting to suppose that if we should happen, at a certain stage 
of our intellectual development, to be able to classify an experience only as 
of the kind which 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
157
could be common to a  seeing and corresponding qualitative and existential 
lookings, all we would have to do to acquire a 'direct designation' for this kind 
of experience would be to pitch in, 'examine' it, locate the kind which it 
exemplifies and which satisfies the above description, name it -- say "f" -- and, 
in full possession of the concept of f, classify such experiences, from now on, 
as f experiences. 
    At this point, it is clear, the concept -- or, as I have put it, the myth -- of the 
given  is  being  invoked  to  explain  the  possibility of  a  direct  account  of 
immediate experience. The myth insists that what I have been treating as one 
problem really subdivides into two, one of which is really no problem at all, 
while the other may have no solution. These problems are, respectively 
How do we become aware of an immediate experience as of one sort, and of a 
simultaneous immediate experience as of another sort? 
How can I know that the labels I attach to the sorts to which my immediate 
experiences belong, are attached by you to the same sorts? May not the sort I 
call "red" be the sort you call "green" -- and so on systematically throughout 
the spectrum? 
We shall find that the second question, to be a philosophical  perplexity, 
presupposes a certain answer to the first question -- indeed the answer given by 
the myth. And it is to this first question that I now turn. Actually there are 
various forms taken by the myth of the given in this connection, depending on 
other philosophical commitments. But they all have in common the idea that 
the awareness of certain  sorts -- and by "sorts" I have in mind, in the first 
instance, determinate sense repeatables -- is a primordial, non-problematic 
feature of 'immediate experience.' In the context of conceptualism, as we have 
seen, this idea took the form of treating sensations  as though they were 
absolutely specific, and infinitely complicated, thoughts. And it is essential to 
an  understanding  of  the  empiricist  tradition  to  realize  that  whereas  the 
contemporary problem of universals primarily concerns the status of repeatable 
determinate features of particular situations, and the contemporary problem of 
abstract ideas is at least as much the problem of what it is to be aware of 
determinate  repeatables  as  of  what  it  is  to  be  aware  of  determinable 
repeatables, Locke, Berkeley and, for that matter, Hume saw the problem of 
abstract ideas as the problem of what it is to be aware of  determinable 
repeatables.{10} Thus, an examination of Locke's Essay makes it clear that he 
is thinking of 
{10} For a systematic elaboration and defense of the following interpretation of Locke, 
Berkeley, and Hume, the reader should consult "Berkeley's Critique of Abstract 
Ideas," a Ph.D. thesis by John Linnell, submitted to the Graduate Faculty of the 
University of Minnesota, June, 1954. 

158
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
a sensation of white as the sort of thing that can become an abstract idea 
(occurrent) of White -- a thought of White "in the Understanding" -- merely 
by virtue of being separated from the context of other sensations (and 
images) which accompany it on a particular occasion. In other words, for 
Locke an abstract (occurrent) idea of the determinate repeatable Whiteness 
is nothing more than an isolated image of white, which, in turn, differs from 
a  sensation  of white only (to use a modern turn of phrase) by being 
"centrally aroused." 
    In short, for Locke, the problem of how we come to be aware of 
determinate sense repeatables is no problem at all. Merely by virtue of 
having sensations and images we have this awareness.  His problem of 
abstract ideas is the problem of how we come to be able to think of generic 
properties. And, as is clear from the Essay, he approaches this problem in 
terms of what might be called an "adjunctive theory of specification," that 
is, the view that (if we represent the idea of a determinable as the idea of 
being A) the idea of a determinate form of A can be represented as the idea 
of being A and B. It is, of course, notorious that this won't account for the 
relation of the idea of being red to the idea of being crimson. By thinking 
of conjunction as the fundamental logical relation involved in building up 
complex ideas from simple ones, and as the principle of the difference 
between determinable  and determinate ideas, Locke precluded  himself 
from giving even a plausible account of the relation between ideas of 
determinables and ideas of determinates. It is interesting to speculate what 
turn his thought might have taken had he admitted disjunctive as well as 
conjunctive complex ideas, the idea of being A or B alongside the idea of 
being A and B. 
    27.  But my purpose  here  is not  to  develop  a  commentary on  the 
shortcomings of Locke's treatment of abstract ideas, but to emphasize that 
something which is a problem for us was not a problem for him. And it is 
therefore important to note that the same is true of Berkeley. His problem 
was not, as it is often construed, "How do we go from the awareness of 
particulars to ideas of repeatables?" but rather "Granted that in immediate 
experience we are aware of absolutely specific sense qualities, how do we 
come to be conscious of genera pertaining to them, and in what does this 
consciousness consist?" (This is not the only dimension of "abstraction" 
that concerned him, but it is the one that is central to our purpose.) And, 
contrary to the usual interpretation, the essential difference between his 
account and Locke's consists in the fact that whereas Locke was on the 
whole{11} committed to the view that there can be an idea which 
{11} I say that Locke was "on the whole" committed to the view that there can be 
an idea which is of the genus without being of any of its species, because while 
he saw that it couldn't be any one of the species to the exclusion of the others,
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
159
is of the genus without being of any of its species, Berkeley insists that we can 
have an idea of a genus only by having an idea of the genus as, to borrow a 
useful Scotist term, 'contracted' into one of its species. 
    Roughly, Berkeley's contention is that if being A entails being B, then there 
can be no such thing as an idea which is of A without being of B. He infers that 
since  being triangular entails  having some determinately triangular shape, 
there  cannot  be  an  idea  which  is  of  triangle without  being  of  some 
determinately triangular shape. We can be aware of generic triangularity only 
by having an idea which is of triangularity as 'contracted' into one of the 
specific forms of triangularity. Any of the latter will do; they are all "of the 
same sort." 
    28. Now, a careful study of the Treatise makes it clear that Hume is in the 
same boat as Berkeley and Locke, sharing with them the presupposition that 
we have an unacquired ability to be aware of determinate repeatables. It is 
often said that whereas he begins the Treatise by characterizing 'ideas' in terms 
which  do  not  distinguish  between  images and  thoughts,  he  corrects  this 
deficiency in Book I, Part I, Section vii. What these students of Hume tend to 
overlook is that what Hume does in this later section is give an account not of 
what it is to think of repeatables whether determinable or determinate, but of 
what it is to think of determinables, thus of color as contrasted with particular 
shades of color. And his account of the consciousness of determinables takes 
for granted that we have a primordial ability to take account of determinate 
repeatables. Thus, his later account is simply built on, and in no sense a 
revision of, the account of ideas with which he opens the Treatise.
 
and saw no way of avoiding this except by making it of none of the species, he was 
greatly puzzled by this, for he saw that in some sense the idea of the genus must be 
of all the species. We have already noted that if he had admitted disjunction as a 
principle of compounding ideas, he could have said that the idea of the genus is the 
idea of the disjunction of all its species, that the idea of being triangular is the idea 
of being scalene or isosceles. As it was, he thought that to be of all the species it 
would have to be the idea of being scalene and isosceles, which is, of course, the 
idea of an impossibility. 
    Is interesting to note that if Berkeley had faced up to the implications of the 
criterion we shall find him to have adopted, this disjunctive conception of the 
generic idea is the one he would have been led to adopt. For since being G -- where 
'G' stands for a generic character -- entails being S1 or S2 or S3 .... . or Sn, -- where 
'S1' stands for a specific character falling under G -- Berkeley should have taken as 
the  unit  of  ideas  concerning  triangles,  the  idea  of  the  genus  Triangle  as 
differentiated into the set of specific forms of triangularity. But, needless to say, if 
Berkeley had taken this step, he could not have thought of a sensation of crimson 
as a determinate thought. 

160
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
 
    How, then, does he differ from Berkeley and Locke? The latter two had 
supposed that there must be such a thing as an  occurrent thought of a 
determinable,  however  much  they  differed  in  their  account  of  such 
thoughts. Hume, on the other hand, assuming that there are occurrent 
thoughts  of  determinate repeatables,  denies that  there  are  occurrent 
thoughts of determinables. I shall spare the reader the familiar details of 
Hume's attempt to give a constructive account of our consciousness of 
determinables, nor shall I criticize it. For my point is that however much 
Locke, Berkeley, and Hume differ on the problem of abstract ideas, they all 
take for granted that the human mind has an innate ability to be aware of 
certain determinate sorts -- indeed, that we are aware of them simply by 
virtue of having sensations and images. 
    29. Now, it takes but a small twist of Hume's position to get a radically 
different  view.  For  suppose  that  instead  of  characterizing  the  initial 
elements of experience as impressions of, e.g. red, Hume had characterized 
them as  red particulars (and I would be the last to deny that not only 
Hume, but perhaps Berkeley and Locke as well, often treat impressions or 
ideas  of red as though they were  red particulars) then Hume's view, 
expanded to take into account determinates as well as determinables, would 
become the view that all consciousness of sorts or repeatables rests on an 
association of words (e.g. "red") with classes of resembling particulars. 
    It clearly makes all the difference in the world how this association is 
conceived. For if the formation of the association involves not only the 
occurrence  of  resembling  particulars,  but  also  the  occurrence  of  the 
awareness  that they are resembling  particulars, then the givenness of 
determinate kinds or repeatables, say crimson, is merely being replaced by 
the givenness of facts of the form x resembles y, and we are back with an 
unacquired ability to be aware of repeatables, in this case the repeatable 
resemblance. Even more obviously, if the formation of the association 
involves not only the occurrence of red particulars, but the awareness that 
they are red, then the conceptualistic form of the myth has merely been 
replaced by a realistic version, as in the classical sense-datum theory. 
    If, however, the association is not mediated by the awareness of facts 
either of the form x resembles y, or of the form x is f, then we have a view 
of the general type which I will call psychological nominalism, according 
to which  all awareness of  sorts, resemblances, facts, etc., in short, all 
awareness of abstract entities -- indeed, all awareness even of particulars -- 
is a linguistic affair. According to it, not even the awareness of such sorts, 
resemblances, and facts as pertain to so-called immediate experience is 
presupposed by the process of acquiring the use of a language. 
    
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
161
Two remarks are immediately relevant: 
   (1) Although the form of psychological nominalism which one gets by 
modifying Hume's view along the above lines has the essential merit that it 
avoids the mistake of supposing that there are pure episodes of being aware of 
sensory repeatables or sensory facts, and is committed to the view that any 
event which can be referred to in these terms must be, to use Ryle's expression, 
a mongrel categorical-hypothetical, in particular, a verbal episode as being the 
manifestation of associative connections of the word-object and word-word 
types, it nevertheless is impossibly crude and inadequate as an account of the 
simplest concept. 
   (2) Once sensations and images have been purged of epistemic aboutness, the 
primary reason for supposing that the fundamental associative tie between 
language and the world must be between words and 'immediate experiences' 
has disappeared, and the way is clear to recognizing that basic word-world 
associations hold, for example, between "red" and red physical objects, rather 
than between "red" and a supposed class of private red particulars. 
    The second remark, it should be emphasized, does not imply that private 
sensations or impressions may not be essential to the formation of these 
associative connections. For one can certainly admit that the tie between "red" 
and red physical objects -- which tie makes it possible for "red" to mean the 
quality  red  --  is  causally mediated  by  sensations  of  red  without  being 
committed to the mistaken idea that it is "really" sensations of red, rather than 
red physical objects, which are the primary denotation of the word "red." 
VII. THE LOGIC OF 'MEANS'
30. There is a source of the Myth of the Given to which even philosophers who 
are suspicious of the whole idea of inner episodes can fall prey. This is the fact 
that when we picture a child -- or a carrier of slabs -- learning his  first 
language,  we, of course, locate the language learner in a structured logical 
space in which we are at home. Thus, we conceive of him as a person (or, at 
least, a potential person) in a world of physical objects, colored, producing 
sounds, existing in Space and Time. But though it is we who are familiar with 
this logical space, we run the danger, if we are not careful, of picturing the 
language  learner  as  having  ab  initio some  degree  of  awareness  --  "pre-
analytic," limited and fragmentary though it may be -- of this same logical 
space. We picture his state as though it were rather like our own when placed 
in a strange forest on a dark night. In other words, unless we are careful, we 
can easily take for granted that the process of teaching a child to use a 
language is that of teaching it to discriminate elements 

162
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
within a logical space of particulars, universals, facts, etc., of which it is 
already  undiscriminatingly aware, and  to  associate  these  discriminated 
elements with verbal symbols. And this mistake is in principle the same 
whether the logical space of which the child is supposed to have this 
undiscriminating awareness  is conceived  by  us to  be  that  of physical 
objects or of private sense contents. 
    The real test of a theory of language lies not in its account of what has 
been called (by H. H. Price) "thinking in absence," but in its account of 
"thinking in presence" -- that is to say, its account of those occasions on 
which the fundamental connection of language with nonlinguistic fact is 
exhibited. And many theories which look like psychological nominalism 
when one views their account of thinking in absence, turn out to be quite 
"Augustinian" when the scalpel is turned to their account of thinking in 
presence. 
    31.  Now,  the  friendly  use  I  have  been  making  of  the  phrase 
"psychological  nominalism"  may  suggest  that  I  am  about  to  equate 
concepts with words, and thinking, in so far as it is episodic, with verbal 
episodes. I must now hasten to say that I shall do nothing of the sort, or, at 
least, that if I  do do  something of the sort, the view I shall shortly be 
developing is only in a relatively Pickwickian sense an equation of thinking 
with the use of language. I wish to emphasize, therefore, that as I am using 
the term, the primary connotation of "psychological nominalism" is the 
denial that there is any awareness of logical space prior to, or independent 
of, the acquisition of a language. 
    However, although I shall later be distinguishing between thoughts and 
their verbal expression, there is a point of fundamental importance which is 
best made before more subtle distinctions are drawn. To begin with, it is 
perfectly clear that the word "red" would not be a predicate if it didn't have 
the logical syntax characteristic of predicates. Nor would it be the predicate 
it is, unless, in certain frames of mind, at least, we tended to respond to red 
objects in standard circumstances with something having the force of "This 
is red." And once we have abandoned the idea that learning to use the word 
"red" involves antecedent episodes of the awareness of redness -- not to be 
confused, of course, with  sensations of red -- there is a temptation to 
suppose that the word "red" means the quality red by virtue of these two 
facts: briefly, the fact that it has the syntax of a predicate, and the fact that 
it is a response (in certain circumstances) to red objects. 
    But  this  account  of  the  meaningfulness  of  "red,"  which  Price  has 
correctly  stigmatized  as  the  "thermometer  view,"  would  have  little 
plausibility if it were not reinforced by another line of thought which takes 
its point of departure from the superficial resemblance of
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
163
 
(In German) "rot" means red
to such relational statements as 
Cowley adjoins Oxford.
For once one assimilates the form 
". . ." means - - -
to the form 
x R y
and thus takes it for granted that meaning is a relation between a word and a 
nonverbal entity, it is tempting to suppose that the relation in question is that of 
association. 
    The truth of the matter, of course, is that statements of the form "'. . .' means 
- - -" are not relational statements, and that while it is indeed the case that the 
word "rot" could not mean the quality red unless it were associated with red 
things, it would be misleading to say that the semantical statement "'Rot' means 
red" says of "rot" that it [is] associated with red things. For this would suggest 
that the semantical statement is, so to speak definitional shorthand for a longer 
statement about the associative connections of "rot," which is not the case. The 
rubric "'. . .' means - - -" is a linguistic device for conveying the information 
that a  mentioned word, in this case "rot," plays the same role in a certain 
linguistic economy, in this case the linguistic economy of German-speaking 
peoples, as does the word "red," which is not mentioned but used -- used in a 
unique way; exhibited, so to speak -- and which occurs "on the right-hand side" 
of the semantical statement. 
    We see, therefore, how the two statements 
"Und" means and
and 
"Rot" means red
can tell us quite different things about "und" and "rot," for the first conveys the 
information  that  "und"  plays the  purely formal  role  of  a  certain  logical 
connective, the second that "rot" plays in German the role of the observation 
word "red" -- in spite of the fact that  means has the same sense in each 
statement, and without having to say that the first says of "und" that it stands in 
"the meaning relation" to Conjunction, or the second that "rot" stands in "the 
meaning relation" to Redness.{12} 
{12} For an analysis of the problem of abstract entities built on this interpretation of 
semantical statements, see my "Empiricism and Abstract Entities"  in  Paul  A. 
Schlipp (ed.),  The Philosophy of Rudolph Carnap. Wilmette (Ill.), 1963; also 
"Abstract Entities," The Review of Metaphysics, June, 1963. 

164
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
    These considerations make it clear that nothing whatever can be inferred 
about the complexity of the role played by the word "red" or about the 
exact way in which the word "red" is related to red things, from the truth of 
the  semantical  statement  "'red'  means  the  quality  red."  And  no 
consideration  arising  from  the  'Fido'-Fido  aspect  of  the  grammar  of 
"means" precludes one from claiming that the role of the word "red" by 
virtue of which it can correctly be said to have the meaning it does is a 
complicated one indeed, and that one cannot understand the meaning of the 
word "red" -- "know what redness is" -- uniess one has a great deal of 
knowledge which classical empiricism would have held to have a purely 
contingent  relationship  with  the  possession  of  fundamental  empirical 
concepts. 
VIII. DOES EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE HAVE A FOUNDATION?
32. One of the forms taken by the Myth of the Given is the idea that there 
is, indeed must be, a structure of particular matter of fact such that (a) each 
fact can not only be noninferentially known to be the case, but presupposes 
no other knowledge either of particular matter of fact, or of general truths; 
and (b) such that the noninferential knowledge of facts belonging to this 
structure constitutes the ultimate court of appeals for all factual claims -- 
particular and general -- about the world. It is important to note that I 
characterized the knowledge of fact belonging to this stratum as not only 
noninferential, but as presupposing no knowledge of other matter of fact, 
whether particular or general. It might be thought that this is a redundancy, 
that knowledge (not belief or conviction, but knowledge) which logically 
presupposes knowledge of other facts must be inferential. This, however, as 
I hope to show, is itself an episode in the Myth. 
    Now, the idea of such a privileged stratum of fact is a familiar one, 
though not without its difficulties. Knowledge pertaining to this level is 
noninferential, yet it is, after all,  knowledge. It is  ultimate, yet it has 
authority.  The  attempt  to  make  a  consistent  picture  of  these  two 
requirements has traditionally taken the following form: 
    Statements pertaining to this level, in order to 'express knowledge' must not only 
be made, but, so to speak, must be worthy of being made, credible, that is, in the 
sense of worthy of credence. Furthermore, and this is a crucial point, they must be 
made in a way which  involves this credibility. For where there is no connection 
between the making of a statement and its authority, the assertion may express 
conviction, but it can scarcely be said to express knowledge. 
    The authority -- the credibility -- of statements pertaining to this level cannot 
exhaustively consist in the fact that they are supported by other statements, for in 
that case all knowledge pertaining to this level would have to be inferential, which 
not only contradicts the hypothesis, but flies 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
165
in the face of good sense. The conclusion seems inevitable that if some statements 
pertaining to this level are to express  noninferential knowledge, they must have a 
credibility which is not a matter of being supported by other statements. Now there 
does seem to be a class of statements which fill at least part of this bill, namely such 
statements  as  would  be  said  to  report  observations,  thus,  "This  is  red."  These 
statements, candidly made, have authority. Yet they are not expressions of inference. 
How, then, is this authority to be understood? 
    Clearly, the argument continues, it springs from the fact that they are made in just 
the  circumstances in  which they are made,  as is indicated  by the  fact that  they 
characteristically, though not necessarily or without exception, involve those so-called 
token-reflexive expressions which, in addition to the tenses of verbs, serve to connect 
the circumstances in which a statement is made with its sense. (At this point it will be 
helpful to begin putting the line of thought I am developing in terms of the fact-stating 
and  observation-reporting roles  of  certain  sentences.)  Roughly,  two  verbal 
performances which are tokens of a non-token-reflexive sentence can occur in widely 
different circumstances and yet make the same statement; whereas two tokens of a 
token-reflexive sentence can make the same statement only if they are uttered in the 
same circumstances (according to a relevant criterion of sameness). And two tokens of 
a sentence, whether it contains a token-reflexive expression -- over and above a tensed 
verb -- or not, can make the same report only if, made in all candor, they express the 
presence -- in some sense of "presence" -- of the state of affairs that is being reported; 
if, that is, they stand in that relation to the state of affairs, whatever the relation may be, 
by virtue of which they can be said to formulate observations of it. 
    It would appear, then, that there are two ways in which a sentence token can have 
credibility: (1) The authority may accrue to it, so to speak, from above, that is, as being 
a token of a sentence type all the token of which, in a certain use, have credibility, e.g. 
"2+2=4". In this case, let us say that token credibility is inherited from type authority. 
(2) The credibility may accrue to it from the fact that it came to exist in a certain way in 
a certain set of circumstances, e.g. "This is red." Here token credibility is not derived 
from type credibility. 
    Now. the credibility of some sentence types appears to be intrinsic -- at least in the 
limited sense that it is not derived from other sentences, type or token. This is, or seems 
to be, the case with certain sentences used to make analytic statements. The credibility 
of  some sentence types accrues to them by virtue of their logical relations to other 
sentence types, thus by virtue of the fact that they are logical consequences of more 
basic sentences. It would seem obvious, however, that the credibility of empirical 
sentence types cannot be traced without remainder to the credibility of other sentence 
types. And since no empirical sentence type appears to have intrinsic credibility, this 
means that credibility must accrue to some empirical sentence types by virtue of their 
logical  relations  to  certain  sentence  tokens,  and,  indeed,  to  sentence  tokens  the 
authority of which is not derived, in its turn, from the authority of sentence types.

166
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
 
    The picture we get is that of there being two ultimate modes of credibility: (1) 
The intrinsic credibility of analytic sentences, which accrues to tokens as being 
tokens of such a type; (2) the credibility of such tokens as "express observations," a 
credibility which flows from tokens to types. 
    33. Let us explore this picture, which is common to all traditional 
empiricisms, a bit further. How is the authority of such sentence tokens as 
"express observational knowledge" to be understood? It has been tempting 
to suppose that in spite of the obvious differences which exist between 
"observation  reports"  and  "analytic  statements,"  there  is  an  essential 
similarity between the ways in which they come by their authority. Thus, it 
has been claimed, not without plausibility, that whereas ordinary empirical 
statements can be correctly made without being true, observation reports 
resemble analytic statements in that being correctly made is a sufficient as 
well as necessary condition of their truth. And it has been inferred from this 
-- somewhat hastily, I believe -- that "correctly making" the report "This is 
green" is a matter of "following the rules for the use of 'this,' 'is' and 
'green.'" 
    Three comments are immediately necessary: 
    (1) First a brief remark about the term "report." In ordinary usage a 
report is a report made by someone to someone. To make a report is to do 
something. In the literature of epistemology, however, the word "report" or 
"Konstatierung" has acquired a technical use in which a sentence token can 
play a reporting role (a) without being an overt verbal performance, and (b) 
without having the character of being "by someone to someone" -- even 
oneself. There is, of course, such a thing as "talking to oneself" -- in foro 
interno -- but, as I shall be emphasizing in the closing stages of my 
argument, it is important not to suppose that all "covert" verbal episodes 
are of this kind. 
    (2) My second comment is that while we shall not assume that because 
'reports'  in  the  ordinary  sense are  actions,  'reports'  in  the  sense  of 
Konstatierungen are also actions, the line of thought we are considering 
treats  them  as  such.  In  other  words,  it  interprets  the  correctness  of 
Konstatierungen as  analogous  to  the  rightness  of  actions.  Let  me 
emphasize, however, that not all ought is ought to do, not all correctness 
the correctness of actions. 
    (3) My third comment is that if the expression "following a rule" is taken 
seriously, and is not weakened beyond all recognition into the bare notion 
of exhibiting a uniformity -- in which case the lightning-thunder sequence 
would  "follow a  rule"  -- then it  is  the knowledge or  belief  that  the 
circumstances are of a certain kind, and not the mere fact that they are of 
this kind, which contributes to bringing about the action. 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
167
    34. In the light of these remarks it is clear that if observation reports are 
construed as actions, if their correctness is interpreted as the correctness of an 
action, and if the authority of an observation report is construed as the fact that 
making it is "following a rule" in the proper sense of this phrase, then we are 
face  to  face  with  givenness  in  its  most  straightforward  form.  For  these 
stipulations commit one to the idea that the authority of Konstatierungen rests 
on nonverbal episodes of awareness -- awareness that something is the case, 
e.g. that this is green -- which nonverbal episodes have an intrinsic authority 
(they are, so to speak, 'self-authenticating') which the verbal performances (the 
Konstatierungen) properly performed "express." One is committed to a stratum 
of authoritative nonverbal episodes ("awarenesses"), the authority of which 
accrues to a superstructure of  verbal actions, provided that the expressions 
occurring in these actions are properly used. These self-authenticating episodes 
would constitute the tortoise on which stands the elephant on which rests the 
edifice of empirical knowledge. The essence of the view is the same whether 
these intrinsically authoritative episodes are such items as the awareness that a 
certain sense content is green or such items as the awareness that a certain 
physical object looks to oneself to be green. 
    35. But what is the alternative? We might begin by trying something like the 
following: An overt or covert token of "This is green" in the presence of a 
green item is a Konstatierung and expresses observational knowledge if and 
only if it is a manifestation of a tendency to produce overt or covert tokens of 
"This is green" -- given a certain set -- if and only if a green object is being 
looked at in standard conditions. Clearly on this interpretation the occurrence 
of such tokens of "This is green" would be "following a rule" only in the sense 
that  they  are  instances  of  a  uniformity,  a  uniformity  differing  from  the 
lightning-thunder case in that it is an acquired causal characteristic of the 
language  user.  Clearly  the  above  suggestion,  which  corresponds  to  the 
"thermometer view" criticized by Professor Price, and which we have already 
rejected, won't do as it stands. Let us see, however, if it cannot be revised to fit 
the criteria I have been using for "expressing observational knowledge." 
    The first hurdle to be jumped concerns the  authority which, as I have 
emphasized, a sentence token must have in order that it may be said to express 
knowledge. Clearly, on  this  account  the only thing that  can remotely be 
supposed to constitute such authority is the fact that one can infer the presence 
of a green object from the fact that someone makes this report. As we have 
already noticed, the correctness of a report does not have to be construed as the 
rightness of an action. A report can be correct as being an instance of a general 
mode 

168
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
of behavior which, in a given linguistic community, it is reasonable to 
sanction and support. 
    The second hurdle is, however, the decisive one. For we have seen that 
to be the expression of knowledge, a report must not only have authority, 
this authority must in some sense be recognized by the person whose report 
it is. And this is a steep hurdle indeed. For if the authority of the report 
"This  is  green"  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  existence  of  green  items 
appropriately related to the perceiver can be inferred from the occurrence 
of such reports, it follows that only a person who is able to draw this 
inference, and therefore who has not only the concept green, but also the 
concept  of  uttering  "This  is  green"  --  indeed,  the  concept  of  certain 
conditions of perception, those which would correctly be called 'standard 
conditions' -- could be in a position to token "This is green" in recognition 
of its authority. In other words, for a  Konstatierung "This is green" to 
"express observational knowledge," not only must it be a symptom or sign 
of the presence of a green object in standard conditions, but the perceiver 
must know that tokens of "This is green" are symptoms of the presence of 
green objects in conditions which are standard for visual perception. 
    36. Now it might be thought that there is something obviously absurd in 
the idea that before a token uttered by, say, Jones could be the expression 
of observational knowledge, Jones would have to know that overt verbal 
episodes of this kind are  reliable indicators of the existence, suitably 
related to the speaker, of green objects. I do not think that it is. Indeed, I 
think that something very like it is true. The point I wish to make now, 
however, is that if it is true, then it follows, as a matter of simple logic, that 
one could not have observational knowledge of any fact unless one knew 
many other things as well. And let me emphasize that the point is not taken 
care of by distinguishing between  knowing how and  knowing that, and 
admitting that observational knowledge requires a lot of "know how." For 
the point is specifically that observational knowledge of any particular fact, 
e.g. that this is green, presupposes that one knows general facts of the form 
X is a reliable symptom of Y. And to admit this requires an abandonment of 
the traditional empiricist idea that observational knowledge "stands on its 
own  feet."  Indeed,  the  suggestion  would  be  anathema  to  traditional 
empiricists for the obvious reason that by making observational knowledge 
presuppose knowledge of general facts of the form X is a reliable symptom 
of Y, it runs counter to the idea that we come to know general facts of this 
form only  after we have come to  know by observation a  number of 
particular facts which support the hypothesis that X is a symptom of Y. 
    And it might be thought that there is an obvious regress in the view we 
are examining. Does it not tell us that observational knowledge at 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
169
time t presupposes knowledge of the form X is a reliable symptom of Y, which 
presupposes  prior observational  knowledge,  which  presupposes  other 
knowledge of the form X is a reliable symptom of Y, which presupposes still 
other, and prior, observational knowledge, and so on? This charge, however, 
rests on too simple, indeed a radically mistaken, conception of what one is 
saying of Jones when one says that he  knows that-p. It is not just that the 
objection supposes that knowing is an episode; for clearly there are episodes 
which we can correctly characterize as knowings, in particular,  observings. 
The essential point is that in characterizing an episode or a state as that of 
knowing, we are not giving an empirical description of that episode or state; we 
are placing it in the logical space of reasons, of justifying and being able to 
justify what one says. 
    37. Thus, all that the view I am defending requires is that no tokening by S 
now of "This is green" is to count as "expressing observational knowledge" 
unless it is also correct to say of S that he now knows the appropriate fact of 
the form X is a reliable symptom of Y, namely that (and again I oversimplify) 
utterances of "This is green" are reliable indicators of the presence of green 
objects in standard conditions of perception. And while the correctness of this 
statement about Jones requires that Jones could now cite prior particular facts 
as evidence for the idea that these utterances are reliable indicators, it requires 
only that it is correct to say that Jones now knows, thus remembers{13}, that 
these particular facts did obtain. It does not require that it be correct to say that 
at the time these facts did obtain he then knew them to obtain. And the regress 
disappears. 
    Thus, while Jones's ability to give inductive reasons today is built on a long 
history of acquiring and manifesting verbal habits in perceptual situations, and, 
in particular, the occurrence of verbal episodes, e.g."This is green," which is 
superficially like those which are later properly said to express observational 
knowledge,  it  does  not  require  that  any  episode  in  this  prior  time  be 
characterizeable as expressing knowledge. (At this point, the reader should 
reread Section 19 above.) 
    38. The idea that observation "strictly and properly so-called" is constituted 
by certain self-authenticating nonverbal episodes, the authority of which is 
transmitted to verbal and quasi-verbal performances when these performances 
are made "in conformity with the semantical rules of the language," is, of 
course, the heart of the Myth of the Given, For the given, in epistemological 
tradition, is what is taken by these self-authenticating episodes. These 'takings' 
are, so to speak, the unmoved movers of empirical knowledge, the 
{13}  (Added  1963)  My  thought  was  that  one  can  have  direct  (non-inferential) 
knowledge of a past fact which one did not or even (as in the case envisaged) could 
not conceptualize at the time it was present. 

170
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
'knowings in presence' which are presupposed by all other knowledge, both 
the knowledge of general truths and the knowledge 'in absence' of other 
particular  matters  of fact. Such is the framework in which traditional 
empiricism makes its characteristic claim that the perceptually given is the 
foundation of empirical knowledge. 
    Let me make it clear, however, that if I reject this framework, it is not 
because I should deny that observings are inner episodes, nor that strictly 
speaking they are nonverbal episodes. It will be my contention, however, 
that the sense in which they are nonverbal -- which is also the sense in 
which thought episodes are nonverbal is one which gives no aid or comfort 
to epistemological givenness. In the concluding sections of this paper, I 
shall attempt to explicate the logic of inner episodes, and show that we can 
distinguish between observations and thoughts, on the one hand, and their 
verbal expression on the other, without making the mistakes of traditional 
dualism. I shall also attempt to explicate the logical status of impressions or 
immediate experiences, and thus bring to a successful conclusion the quest 
with which my argument began. 
    One final remark before I begin this task. If I reject the framework of 
traditional  empiricism,  it  is  not  because  I  want to  say that  empirical 
knowledge has no foundation. For to put it this way is to suggest that it is 
really "empirical knowledge so-called," and to put it in a box with rumors 
and hoaxes. There is clearly some point to the picture of human knowledge 
as resting on a level of propositions -- observation reports -- which do not 
rest on other propositions in the same way as other propositions rest on 
them.  On  the  other  hand,  I  do  wish  to  insist  that  the  metaphor  of 
"foundation" is misleading in that it keeps us from seeing that if there is a 
logical dimension in which other empirical propositions rest on observation 
reports, there is another logical dimension in which the latter rest on the 
former. 
    Above all, the picture is misleading because of its static character. One 
seems forced to choose between the picture of an elephant which rests on a 
tortoise (What supports the tortoise?) and the picture of a great Hegelian 
serpent of knowledge with its tail in its mouth (Where does it begin?). 
Neither will do. For empirical knowledge, like its sophisticated extension, 
science, is rational, not because it has a foundation but because it is a self-
correcting enterprise which can put any claim in jeopardy, though not all at 
once. 
IX. SCIENCE AND ORDINARY USAGE
39.  There  are  many strange  and  exotic  specimens  in  the  gardens  of 
philosophy: Epistemology, Ontology, Cosmology, to name but a few. And 
clearly there is much good sense -- not only rhyme but reason -- 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
171
to these labels. It is not my purpose, however, to animadvert on the botanizing 
of philosophies and things philosophical, other than to call attention to a recent 
addition to the list of philosophical flora and fauna, the Philosophy of Science. 
Nor shall I attempt to locate this new specialty in a classificatory system. The 
point I wish to make, however, can be introduced by calling to mind the fact 
that classificatory schemes, however theoretical their purpose, have practical 
consequences: nominal causes, so to speak, have real effects. As long as there 
was no such subject as 'philosophy of science,' all students of philosophy felt 
obligated to keep at least one eye part of the time on both the methodological 
and the substantive aspects of the scientific enterprise. And if the result was 
often a confusion of the task of philosophy with the task of science, and almost 
equally often a projection of the framework of the latest scientific speculations 
into the common-sense picture of the world (witness the almost unquestioned 
assumption, today, that the common-sense world of physical objects in Space 
and  Time  must  be  analyzable into  spatially  and  temporally,  or  even 
spatiotemporally, related  events), at least it had the merit of ensuring that 
reflection on the nature and implications of scientific discourse was an integral 
and vital part of philosophical thinking generally. But now that philosophy of 
science has nominal as well as real existence, there has arisen the temptation to 
leave it to the specialists, and to confuse the sound idea that philosophy is not 
science with the mistaken idea that philosophy is independent of science. 
    40. As long as discourse was viewed as a map, subdivided into a side-by-
side of sub-maps, each representing a sub-region in a side-by-side of regions 
making up the total subject matter of discourse, and as long as the task of the 
philosopher was conceived to be the piecemeal one of analysis in the sense of 
definition -- the task, so to speak, of "making little ones out of big ones" -- one 
could  view  with  equanimity  the  existence  of  philosophical  specialists  -- 
specialists  in  formal  and  mathematical  logic,  in  perception,  in  moral 
philosophy, etc. For if discourse were as represented above, where would be 
the harm of each man fencing himself off in his own garden? In spite, however, 
of the persistence of the slogan "philosophy is analysis," we now realize that 
the atomistic conception of philosophy is a snare and a delusion. For "analysis" 
no longer connotes the definition of terms, but rather the clarification of the 
logical structure -- in the broadest sense -- of discourse, and discourse no 
longer appears as one plane parallel to another, but as a tangle of intersecting 
dimensions whose relations with one another and with extra-linguistic fact 
conform  to  no  single  or  simple  pattern.  No  longer  can  the  philosopher 
interested in perception say "let him who is interested in prescriptive discourse 

172
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
analyze its concepts and leave me in peace." Most if not all philosophically 
interesting  concepts  are  caught  up  in  more  than  one  dimension  of 
discourse, and while the atomism of early analysis has a healthy successor 
in the contemporary stress on journeyman tactics, the grand strategy of the 
philosophical enterprise is once again directed toward that articulated and 
integrated vision of man-in-the-universe -- or, shall I say discourse-about-
man-in-all-discourse -- which has traditionally been its goal. 
    But the moral I wish specifically to draw is that no longer can one 
smugly say "Let the person who is interested in scientific discourse analyze 
scientific  discourse  and  let  the  person  who  is  interested  in  ordinary 
discourse analyze ordinary discourse." Let me not be misunderstood. I am 
not saying that in order to discern the logic -- the polydimensional logic -- 
of ordinary discourse, it is necessary to make use of the results or the 
methods of the sciences. Nor even that, within limits, such a division of 
labor is not a sound corollary of the journeyman's approach. My point is 
rather that what we call the scientific enterprise is the flowering of a 
dimension of discourse which already exists in what historians call the 
"prescientific stage," and that failure to understand this type of discourse 
"writ large" -- in science -- may lead, indeed has often led to a failure to 
appreciate its role in "ordinary usage," and, as a result, to a failure to 
understand the full logic of even the most fundamental, the "simplest" 
empirical terms. 
    41. Another point of equal importance. The procedures of philosophical 
analysis as such may make no use of the methods or results of the sciences. 
But familiarity with the trend  of scientific  thought  is essential  to  the 
appraisal of the framework categories of the common-sense picture of the 
world. For if the line of thought embodied in the preceding paragraphs is 
sound, if, that is to say, scientific discourse is but a continuation of a 
dimension of discourse which has been present in human discourse from 
the very beginning, then one would expect there to be a sense in which the 
scientific picture of the world replaces the common-sense picture; a sense 
in which the scientific account of "what there is" supersedes the descriptive 
ontology of everyday life. 
    Here one must be cautious. For there is a right way and a wrong way to 
make this point. Many years ago it used to be confidently said that science 
has shown, for example, that physical objects aren't really colored. Later it 
was pointed out that if this is interpreted as the claim that the sentence 
"Physical objects have colors" expresses an empirical proposition which, 
though widely believed by common sense, has been shown by science to be 
false, then, of course, this claim is absurd. The idea that physical objects 
aren't colored can make sense only as the (misleading) expression of one 
aspect of a 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
173
philosophical critique of the very framework of physical objects located in 
Space and enduring through Time. In short, "Physical objects aren't really 
colored" makes sense only as a clumsy expression of the idea that there are no 
such things as the colored physical objects of the common-sense world, where 
this is interpreted,  not  as an empirical  proposition  -- like "There  are  no 
nonhuman featherless bipeds" -- within the common-sense frame, but as the 
expression of a rejection (in some sense) of this very framework itself, in favor 
of another built around different, if not unrelated, categories. This rejection 
need not, of course, be a practical rejection. It need not, that is, carry with it a 
proposal to brain-wash existing populations and train them to speak differently. 
And, of course, as long as the existing framework is used, it will be incorrect 
to say -- otherwise than to make a philosophical point about the framework -- 
that no object is really colored, or is located in Space, or endures through 
Time. But,  speaking as a philosopher, I am quite prepared to say that the 
common-sense world of physical objects in Space and Time is unreal -- that is, 
that there are no such things. Or, to put it less paradoxically, that in the 
dimension of describing and explaining the world, science is the measure of all 
things, of what is that it is, and of what is not that it is not. 
    43. There is a widespread impression that reflection on how we learn the 
language in which, in everyday life, we describe the world,  leads to the 
conclusion that the categories of the common-sense picture of the world have, 
so to speak, an unchallengeable authenticity. There are, of course, different 
conceptions of just what this fundamental categorial framework is. For some it 
is sense contents and phenomenal relations between them; for others physical 
objects, persons, and processes in Space and Time. But whatever their points 
of difference, the philosophers I have in mind are united in the conviction that 
what  is  called  the  "ostensive  tie"  between  our  fundamental  descriptive 
vocabulary and the world rules out of court as utterly absurd any notion that 
there are no such thing as this framework talks about. 
    An integral part of this conviction is what I shall call (in an extended sense) 
the positivistic conception of science, the idea that the framework of theoretical 
objects (molecules, electromagnetic fields, etc.) and their relationships is, so to 
speak, an  auxiliary framework. In its most explicit form, it is the idea that 
theoretical  objects  and  propositions  concerning  them  are  "calculational 
devices," the value and status of which consist in their systematizing and 
heuristic role with respect to confirmable generalizations formulated in the 
framework of terms which enjoy a direct ostensive link with the world. One is 
tempted to put this by saying that according to these philosophers, 

174
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
the objects of ostensively linked discourse behave as if and only as if they 
were bound up with or consisted of scientific entities. But, of course, these 
philosophers would hasten to point out (and rightly so) that 
X behaves as if it consisted of Y's
makes sense only by contrast with 
X behaves as it does because it does consist of Y's
whereas their contention is exactly that where the Y's are scientific objects, 
no such contrast makes sense. 
    The point I am making is that as long as one thinks that there is a 
framework, whether of physical objects or of sense contents, the absolute 
authenticity of which is guaranteed by the fact that the learning of this 
framework involves an "ostensive step," so long one will be tempted to 
think of the authority of theoretical discourse as entirely derivative, that of 
a calculational auxiliary, an effective heuristic device. It is one of my prime 
purposes,  in  the  following  sections,  to  convince  the  reader  that  this 
interpretation of the status of the scientific picture of the world rests on two 
mistakes: (1) a misunderstanding (which I have already exposed) of the 
ostensive element in the learning and use of a language -- the Myth of the 
Given;  (2)  a  reification  of  the  methodological distinction  between 
theoretical  and  non-theoretical  discourse  into  a  substantive distinction 
between theoretical and non-theoretical existence. 
    44. One way of summing up what I have been saying above is by saying 
that there is a widespread impression abroad, aided and abetted by a naive 
interpretation of concept formation, that philosophers of science deal with a 
mode of discourse which is, so to speak, a peninsular offshoot from the 
mainland  of  ordinary  discourse.  The  study  of  scientific  discourse  is 
conceived to be a worthy employment for those who have the background 
and  motivation  to  keep  track  of  it,  but  an  employment  which  is 
fundamentally a hobby divorced from the perplexities of the mainland. But, 
of course, this summing up won't quite do. For all philosophers would 
agree  that  no  philosophy  would  be  complete  unless  it  resolved  the 
perplexities which arise when one attempts to think through the relationship 
of the framework of modern science to ordinary discourse. My point, 
however, is not that any one would reject the idea that this is a proper task 
for philosophy, but that, by approaching the language in which the plain 
man describes and  explains empirical fact with the presuppositions of 
givenness, they are led to a "resolution" of these perplexities along the lines 
of what I have called the positivistic or peninsular conception of scientific 
discourse -- a "resolution" which, I believe, is not only superficial, but 
positively mistaken. 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
175
X. PRIVATE EPISODES: THE PROBLEM
45.  Let us now return, after a long absence, to the problem of how the 
similarity among the experiences of seeing that an object over there is red, its 
looking to one that an object over there is red (when in point of fact it is not 
red) and its looking to one as though there were a red object over there (when 
in fact there is  nothing over there at all) is to be understood. Part of this 
similarity, we saw, consists in the fact that they all involve the idea -- the 
proposition, if you please -- that the object over there is red. But over and 
above  this there  is,  of course, the aspect which many philosophers have 
attempted to clarify by the notion of impressions or immediate experience. 
    It was pointed out in Sections 21 ff. above that there are prima facie two 
ways in which facts of the form  x merely looks red might be explained, in 
addition to the kind of explanation which is based on empirical generalizations 
relating the color of objects, the circumstances in which they are seen, and the 
colors  they  look  to  have.  These  two  ways  are  (a)  the  introduction  of 
impressions  or  immediate  experiences  as  theoretical  entities;  and  (b)  the 
discovery, on scrutinizing these situations, that they contain impressions or 
immediate experiences as components. I called attention to the paradoxical 
character of the first of these alternatives, and refused, at that time, to take it 
seriously. But in the meantime the second alternative, involving as it does the 
Myth of the Given, has turned out to be no more satisfactory. 
    For, in the first place, how are these impressions to be described, if not by 
using such words as "red" and "triangular." Yet, if my argument, to date, is 
sound, physical objects alone can be literally red and triangular. Thus, in the 
cases I am considering, there is nothing to be red and triangular. It would seem 
to follow that "impression of a red triangle" could mean nothing more than 
"impression of  the sort which is common to those experiences in which we 
either see that something is red and triangular, or something merely looks red 
and triangular, or there merely looks to be a red and triangular object over 
there." And if we can never characterize "impressions" intrinsically, but only 
by what is logically a definite description, i.e., as the kind of entity which is 
common to such situations, then we would scarcely seem to be any better off 
than  if  we  maintained  that  talk  about  "impressions"  is  a  notational 
convenience, a code, for the language in which we speak of how things look 
and what there looks to be. 
    And this line of thought is reinforced by the consideration that once we give 
up the idea that we begin our sojourn in this world with any -- even a vague, 
fragmentary,  and  undiscriminating  --  awareness  of  the  logical  space  of 
particulars, kinds, facts, and resemblances, and 

176
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
recognize that even such "simple" concepts as those of colors are the fruit 
of  a  long  process  of  publicly  reinforced  responses  to  public  objects 
(including  verbal  performances)  in  public  situations,  we may well be 
puzzled  as  to  how,  even  if  there  are  such  things  as  impressions  or 
sensations, we could come to know that there are, and to know what sort of 
thing they are.  For we now recognize that instead of coming to have a 
concept of something because we have noticed that sort of thing, to have 
the ability to notice a sort of thing is already to have the concept of that 
sort of thing, and cannot account for it. 
    Indeed, once we think this line of reasoning through, we are struck by the 
fact that if it is sound, we are faced not only with the question "How could 
we come to have the idea of an 'impression' or 'sensation?'" but by the 
question "How could we come to have the idea of something's looking red 
to us," or, to get to the crux of the matter, "of seeing that something is red?" 
In  short,  we  are  brought  face  to  face  with  the  general  problem  of 
understanding how there can be inner episodes -- episodes, that is, which 
somehow combine privacy, in that each of us has privileged access to his 
own, with intersubjectivity, in that each of us can, in principle, know about 
the other's. We might try to put this more linguistically as the problem of 
how there can be a sentence (e.g. "S has a toothache") of which it is 
logically true that whereas  anybody can use it to state a fact, only  one 
person, namely S himself, can use it to make a report. But while this is a 
useful  formulation,  it  does  not  do  justice  to  the  supposedly  episodic 
character of the items in question. And that this is the heart of the puzzle is 
shown by the fact that many philosophers who would not deny that there 
are  short-term  hypothetical  and  mongrel  hypothetical-categorical  facts 
about behavior which others can ascribe to us on behavioral evidence, but 
which only we can report, have found it to be logical nonsense to speak of 
non-behavioral episodes of which this is true. Thus, it has been claimed by 
Ryle{14} that the very idea that there are such episodes is a category 
mistake, while others have argued that though there are such episodes, they 
cannot be characterized in intersubjective discourse, learned as it is in a 
context of public objects and in the 'academy' of one's linguistic peers. It is 
my purpose to argue that both these contentions are quite mistaken, and 
that not only are inner episodes  not category mistakes, they are quite 
"effable"  in intersubjective discourse. And it is  my purpose  to  show, 
positively, how this can be the case. I am particularly concerned to make 
this point in connection with such inner episodes as sensations and feelings, 
in short, with what has -- unfortunately, I think -- been called immediate 
experience." For such an account is necessary to round off this 
{14}  Ryle,  Gilbert,  The  Concept  of  Mind.  London:  Hutchinson's  University 
Library, 1949. 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
177
examination of the Myth of the Given. But before I can come to grips with 
these topics, the way must be prepared by a discussion of inner episodes of 
quite another kind, namely thoughts. 
XI. THOUGHTS: THE CLASSICAL VIEW
46. Recent empiricism has been of two minds about the status of thoughts. On 
the one hand, it has resonated to the idea that insofar as there are  episodes 
which are thoughts, they are verbal or linguistic episodes. Clearly, however, 
even if candid overt verbal behaviors by people who had learned a language 
were thoughts, there are not nearly enough of them to account for all the cases 
in which it would be argued that a person was thinking. Nor can we plausibly 
suppose that the remainder is accounted for by those inner episodes which are 
often very clumsily lumped together under the heading "verbal imagery." 
    On the other hand, they have been tempted to suppose that the  episodes 
which are referred to by verbs pertaining to thinking include all forms of 
"intelligent behavior,"  verbal as well as nonverbal, and  that the "thought 
episodes" which are supposed to be manifested by these behaviors are not 
really  episodes  at  all,  but  rather  hypothetical  and  mongrel  hypothetical-
categorical facts about these and still other behaviors. This, however, runs into 
the difficulty that whenever we try to explain what we mean by calling a piece 
of nonhabitual behavior intelligent, we seem to find it necessary to do so in 
terms of  thinking. The uncomfortable feeling will not be downed that the 
dispositional account of thoughts in terms of intelligent behavior is covertly 
circular. 
    47. Now the classical tradition claimed that there is a family of episodes, 
neither overt verbal behavior nor verbal imagery, which are thoughts, and that 
both overt verbal behavior and verbal imagery owe their meaningfulness to the 
fact that they stand to these  thoughts in the unique relation of "expressing" 
them. These episodes are introspectable. Indeed, it was usually believed that 
they could not occur without being known to occur. But this can be traced to a 
number of confusions, perhaps the most important of which was the idea that 
thoughts belong in the same general category as sensations, images, tickles, 
itches, etc. This mis-assimilation of thoughts to sensations and feelings was 
equally, as we saw in Sections 26 ff. above, a mis-assimilation of sensations 
and feelings to thoughts, and a falsification of both. The assumption that if 
there are thought episodes, they must be immediate experiences is common 
both to those who propounded the classical view and to those who reject it, 
saying that they "find no such experiences." If we purge the classical tradition 
of these 

178
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
confusions, it becomes the idea that to each of us belongs a stream of 
episodes,  not  themselves  immediate  experiences,  to  which  we  have 
privileged, but by no means either invariable or infallible, access. These 
episodes can occur without being "expressed" by overt verbal behavior, 
though verbal behavior is -- in an important sense -- their natural fruition. 
Again, we can "hear ourselves think," but the verbal imagery which enables 
us to do this is no more the thinking itself than is the overt verbal behavior 
by which it is expressed and communicated to others. It is a mistake to 
suppose that we must be having verbal imagery -- indeed, any imagery -- 
when  we  "know  what  we  are  thinking"  --  in  short,  to  suppose  that 
"privileged access" must be construed on a perceptual or quasi-perceptual 
model. 
    Now, it is my purpose to defend such a revised classical analysis of our 
common-sense conception of thoughts, and in the course of doing so I shall 
develop distinctions which will later contribute to a resolution, in principle, 
of the puzzle of immediate experience. But before I continue, let me hasten 
to add that it will turn out that the view I am about to expound could, with 
equal appropriateness, be represented as a modified form of the view that 
thoughts are linguistic episodes. 
XII. OUR RYLEAN ANCESTORS
48. But, the reader may well ask, in what sense can these episodes be 
"inner" if they are not immediate experiences? and in what sense can they 
be "linguistic" if they are neither overt linguistic performances nor verbal 
imagery "in foro interno"?  I am going to answer these and the other 
questions I have been raising by making a myth of my own, or, to give it an 
air of up-to-date respectability, by writing a piece of science fiction -- 
anthropological science fiction. Imagine a stage in pre-history in which 
humans are limited to what I shall call a Rylean language, a language of 
which the fundamental descriptive vocabulary speaks of public properties 
of public objects located in Space and enduring through Time. Let me 
hasten to add that it is also Rylean in that although its basic resources are 
limited (how limited I shall be discussing in a moment), its total expressive 
power is very great. For it makes subtle use not only of the elementary 
logical operations of conjunction, disjunction, negation, and quantification, 
but especially of the subjunctive conditional. Furthermore, I shall suppose 
it to be characterized by the presence of the looser logical relations typical 
of ordinary discourse which are referred to by philosophers under the 
heading "vagueness" and "open texture." 
    I am beginning my myth in medias res with humans who have already 
mastered  a  Rylean  language,  because the  philosophical  situation  it  is 
designed to clarify is one in which we are not puzzled by how 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
179
people acquire a language for referring to public properties of public objects, 
but are very puzzled indeed about how we learn to speak of inner episodes and 
immediate experiences. 
    There are, I suppose, still some philosophers who are inclined to think that 
by allowing these mythical ancestors of ours the use ad libitum of subjunctive 
conditionals, we have, in effect, enabled them to say anything that we can say 
when we speak of thoughts, experiences (seeing, hearing, etc.), and immediate 
experiences. I doubt that there are many. In any case, the story I am telling is 
designed to show exactly how the idea that an intersubjective language must be 
Rylean rests on too simple a picture of the relation of intersubjective discourse 
to public objects. 
    49. The questions I am, in effect, raising are "What resources would have to 
be added to the Rylean language of these talking animals in order that they 
might come to recognize each other and themselves as animals that  think, 
observe, and have feelings and sensations, as we use these terms?" and "How 
could the addition of these resources be construed as reasonable?" In the first 
place, the language would have to be enriched with the fundamental resources 
of semantical discourse -- that is to say, the resources necessary for making 
such characteristically semantical statements as "'Rot' means red," and "'Der 
Mond ist rund' is true if and only if the moon is round." It is sometimes said, 
e.g.,  by  Carnap{15},  that  these  resources  can  be  constructed  out  of  the 
vocabulary of formal logic, and that they would therefore already be contained, 
in principle, in our Rylean language. I have criticized this idea in another 
place{16} and shall not discuss it here. In any event, a decision on this point is 
not essential to the argument. 
    Let it be granted, then, that these mythical ancestors of ours are able to 
characterize each other's verbal behavior in semantical terms; that, in other 
words, they not only can talk about each other's predictions as causes and 
effects, and as indicators (with greater or less reliability) of other verbal and 
nonverbal states of affairs, but can also say of these verbal productions that 
they mean thus and so, that they say that such and such, that they are true, 
false, etc. And let me emphasize, as was pointed out in Section 31 above, that 
to make a semantical statement about a verbal event is not a shorthand way of 
talking about its causes and effects, although there is a sense of "imply" in 
which semantical statements about verbal productions do imply information 
about the causes and effects of these productions. 
{15} Carnap, Rudolph,  Introduction to Semantics. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1942. 
{16} See "Truth and Correspondence," Part I; also "Empiricism and Abstract Entities" 
in Paul A. Schilpp (ed.)  The Philosophy of Rudolph Carnap. Library of Living 
Philosophers Evanston (Ill.), 1963. (Available in mimeograph from the author.) 

180
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
Thus, when I say "'Es regnet' means it is raining," my statement "implies" 
that the causes and effects of utterances of "Es regnet" beyond the Rhine 
parallel the causes and effects of utterances of "It is raining" by myself and 
other members of the English-speaking community. And if it didn't imply 
this, it couldn't perform its role. But this is not to say that semantical 
statements are definitional shorthand for statements about the causes and 
effects of verbal performances. 
    50. With the resources of semantical discourse, the language of our 
fictional ancestors has acquired  a dimension which gives considerably 
more plausibility to the claim that they are in a position to talk about 
thoughts just as we are. For characteristic of thoughts is their intentionality, 
reference, or  aboutness, and  it is clear  that semantical talk about the 
meaning or  reference  of verbal expressions has the same structure as 
mentalistic discourse concerning what thoughts are about. It is therefore all 
the more tempting to suppose that the intentionality of  thoughts can be 
traced  to  the  application  of  semantical  categories  to  overt  verbal 
performances, and to suggest a modified Rylean account according to 
which talk about so-called "thoughts" is shorthand for hypothetical and 
mongrel  categorical-hypothetical  statements  about  overt  verbal  and 
nonverbal  behavior,  and that  talk  about  the  intentionality of  these 
"episodes" is correspondingly reducible to semantical talk about the verbal 
components. 
    What is the alternative? Classically it has been the idea that not only are 
there overt verbal episodes which can be characterized in semantical terms, 
but,  over and above these, there are certain inner episodes which are 
properly characterized by the traditional vocabulary of intentionality. And, 
of course, the classical scheme includes the idea that semantical discourse 
about overt verbal performances is to be analyzed in terms of talk about the 
intentionality of the mental episodes which are "expressed" by these overt 
performances. My immediate problem is to see if I can reconcile the 
classical  idea  of  thoughts  as  inner  episodes  which  are  neither  overt 
behavior nor verbal imagery and which are properly referred to in terms of 
the  vocabulary  of  intentionality,  with  the  idea  that  the  categories  of 
intentionality are,  at  bottom,  semantical  categories  pertaining  to  overt 
verbal performances.{17} 
{17} An earlier attempt along these lines is to be found in "Mind, Meaning and 
Behavior" in  Philosophical Studies, 3, pp. 83-94 (1952), and "A Semantical 
Solution to the Mind-Body Problem" in Methodos, 5, pp. 45-84 (1953). 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
181
XIII. THEORIES AND MODELS
51. But what might these episodes be? And, in terms of our science fiction, 
how might our ancestors have come to recognize their existence? The answer 
to these questions is surprisingly straightforward, once the logical space of our 
discussion is enlarged to include a distinction, central to the philosophy of 
science, between the language of  theory and the language of  observation. 
Although this distinction is a familiar one, I shall take a few paragraphs to 
highlight those aspects of the distinction which are of greatest relevance to our 
problem. 
    Informally, to construct a theory is, in its most developed or sophisticated 
form, to postulate a domain of entities which behave in certain ways set down 
by the fundamental principles of the theory, and to correlate -- perhaps, in a 
certain sense to identify -- complexes of these theoretical entities with certain 
non-theoretical objects or situations; that is to say, with objects or situations 
which are either matters of observable fact or, in principle at least, describable 
in observational terms. This "correlation" or "identification" of theoretical with 
observational states of affairs is a tentative one "until further notice," and 
amounts, so to speak, to erecting temporary bridges which permit the passage 
from sentences in observational discourse to sentences in the theory, and vice 
versa. Thus, for example, in the kinetic theory of gases, empirical statements of 
the form "Gas g at such and such a place and time has such and such a volume, 
pressure,  and  temperature"  are  correlated  with  theoretical  statements 
specifying certain statistical  measures of populations of molecules.  These 
temporary bridges are so set up that inductively established laws pertaining to 
gases, formulated  in the language of observable  fact, are  correlated  with 
derived propositions or theorems in the language of the theory, and that no 
proposition in the theory is correlated with a falsified empirical generalization. 
Thus, a good theory (at least of the type we are considering) "explains" 
established empirical laws by deriving theoretical counterparts of these laws 
from a small set of postulates relating to unobserved entities. 
    These remarks, of course, barely scratch the surface of the problem of the 
status of theories in scientific discourse. And no sooner have I made them, than 
I must hasten to qualify them -- almost beyond recognition. For while this by 
now classical account of the nature of theories (one of the earlier formulations 
of which is due to Norman Campbell,{18} and which is to be found more 
recently in the writings 
{18} Campbell, Norman,  Physics: The Element. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1920. 

182
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
of  Carnap,{19}  Reichenbach,{20}  Hempel,{21}  and  Braithwaite{22}) 
does throw light on the logical status of theories, it emphasizes certain 
features at the expense of others. By speaking of the construction of a 
theory  as  the  elaboration  of  a  postulate  system  which  is  tentatively 
correlated  with observational discourse, it gives a highly artificial and 
unrealistic picture of what scientists have actually done in the process of 
constructing theories. I don't wish to  deny that  logically sophisticated 
scientists  today  might and  perhaps,  on  occasion,  do proceed  in  true 
logistical style. I do, however, wish to emphasize two points: 
    (1) The first is that the fundamental assumptions of a theory are usually 
developed not by constructing uninterpreted calculi which might correlate 
in  the  desired  manner  with  observational  discourse,  but  rather  by 
attempting to find a model, i.e. to describe a domain of familiar objects 
behaving in familiar ways such that we can see how the phenomena to be 
explained would arise if they consisted of this sort of thing. The essential 
thing about a model is that it is accompanied, so to speak, by a commentary 
which  qualifies or  limits -- but not precisely nor in all respects -- the 
analogy between the familiar objects and the entities which are being 
introduced by the theory. It is the descriptions of the fundamental ways in 
which the objects in the model domain, thus qualified, behave, which, 
transferred to the theoretical entities, correspond to the postulates of the 
logistical picture of theory construction. 
    (2)  But even more important for our purposes is the fact that the 
logistical picture of theory construction obscures the most important thing 
of all, namely that the process of devising "theoretical" explanations of 
observable phenomena did not spring full-blown from the head of modern 
science.  In  particular,  it  obscures  the  fact  that  not  all  common-sense 
inductive inferences are of the form 
      All observed A's have been B, therefore (probably) all A's are B.
or its statistical counterparts, and leads one mistakenly to suppose that so-
called "hypothetic-deductive" explanation is limited to the sophisticated 
stages of science. The truth of the matter, as I shall shortly be illustrating, is 
that science is continuous with common 
{19}  Carnap,  Rudolph,  "Thc  Interpretation  of  Physics,"  in  H.  Feigl  and  M. 
Brodbeck (eds.),  Readings in the Philosophy of Science, pp. 309-18. New 
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1953. This seiection consists of pp. 59-69 of 
his Foundationss of Logic and Mathematics. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1939. 
{20} Reichenbach, H., Philosophie der Raum-Zeit-Lehre. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1928, 
and Experience and Prediction. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1939. 
{21} Hempel, C.G.,  FundamentaIs of Concept Formation in Empirical Science. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1952. 
{22} Braithwaite, R.B., Scientific Explanation. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1920. 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
183
sense,  and  the  ways  in  which  the  scientist  seeks  to  explain  empirical 
phenomena are refinements of the ways in which plain men, however crudely 
and schematically, have attempted to understand their environment and their 
fellow men since the dawn of intelligence. It is this point which I wish to stress 
at the present time, for I am going to argue that the distinction between 
theoretical and observational discourse is involved in the logic of concepts 
pertaining to inner episodes. I say "involved in" for it would be paradoxical 
and, indeed, incorrect, to say that these concepts are theoretical concepts. 
    52. Now I think it fair to say that some light has already been thrown on the 
expression "inner episodes"; for while it would indeed be a category mistake to 
suppose that the inflammability of a piece of wood is, so to speak, a hidden 
burning which becomes overt or manifest when the wood is placed on the fire, 
not all the unobservable episodes we suppose to go on in the world are the 
offspring of category mistakes. Clearly it is by no means an illegitimate use of 
"in" -- though it is a use which has its own logical grammar -- to say, for 
example, that "in" the air around us there are innumerable molecules which, in 
spite of the observable stodginess of the air, are participating in a veritable 
turmoil of episodes. Clearly, the sense in which these episodes are "in" the air 
is to be explicated in terms of the sense in which the air "is" a population of 
molecules, and this, in turn, in terms of the logic of the relation between 
theoretical and observational discourse. 
    I shall have more to say on this topic in a moment. In the meantime, let us 
return to our mythical ancestors. It will not surprise my readers to learn that the 
second stage in the enrichment of their Rylean language is the addition of 
theoretical discourse. Thus we may suppose these language-using animals to 
elaborate, without methodological sophistication, crude, sketchy, and vague 
theories to explain why things which are similar in their observable properties 
differ in their causal properties, and things which are similar in their causal 
properties differ in their observable properties. 
XIV. METHODOLOGICAL VERSUS PHILOSOPHICAL BEHAVIORISM
53. But we are approaching the time for the central episode in our myth. I want 
you to suppose that in this Neo-Rylean culture there now appears a genius -- let 
us  call  him Jones  --  who  is  an  unsung forerunner  of  the  movement  in 
psychology, once revolutionary, now commonplace, known as Behaviorism. 
Let me emphasize that what I have in mind is Behaviorism as a methodological 
thesis, which I shall be concerned to formulate. For the central and guiding 
theme 

184
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
in the historical complex known by this term has been a certain conception, 
or  family of  conceptions,  of  how to  go  about  building  a  science  of 
psychology. 
    Philosophers have sometimes supposed that Behaviorists are, as such 
committed to the idea that our ordinary mentalistic concepts are analyzable 
in terms of overt  behavior.  But although  behaviorism has  often  been 
characterized by a certain,metaphysical bias, it is not a thesis about the 
analysis of  existing psychological concepts, but one which concerns the 
construction of new concepts. As a methodological thesis, it involves no 
commitment whatever concerning the logical analysis of common-sense 
mentalistic discourse, nor does it involve a denial that each of us has a 
privileged access to our state of mind, nor that these states of mind can 
properly  be  described  in  terms  of  such  common-sense  concepts  as 
believing, wondering, doubting, intending, wishing, inferring, etc. If we 
permit ourselves to speak of this privileged access to our states of mind as 
"introspection," avoiding the implication that there is a "means" whereby 
we "see" what is going on "inside," as we see external circumstances by the 
eye, then we can say that Behaviorism, as I shall use the term, does not 
deny that there is such a thing as introspection, nor that it is, on some 
topics, at least, quite reliable. The essential point about 'introspection' from 
the standpoint of Behaviorism is that  we introspect in terms of common 
sense mentalistic concepts. And while the Behaviorist admits, as anyone 
must, that  much knowledge is  embodied  in common-sense mentalistic 
discourse, and that still more can be gained in the future by formulating and 
testing hypotheses in terms of them, and while he admits that it is perfectly 
legitimate to call such a psychology "scientific," he proposes, for his own 
part, to make no more than a heuristic use of mentalistic discourse, and to 
construct his concepts "from scratch" in the course of developing his own 
scientific account of the observable behavior of human organisms. 
    54. But while it is quite clear that scientific Behaviorism is not the thesis 
that common-sense psychological concepts are  analyzable into concepts 
pertaining to overt behavior -- a thesis which has been maintained by some 
philosophers  and  which  may  be  called  'analytical'  or  'philosophical' 
Behaviorism -- it is often thought that Behaviorism is committed to the idea 
that the concepts of a behavioristic psychology must be so analyzable, or, 
to put things right side up, that properly introduced behavioristic concepts 
must be built by explicit definition -- in the broadest sense -- from a basic 
vocabulary pertaining to overt behavior. The Behaviorist would thus be 
saying "Whether  or  not  the  mentalistic  concepts  of everyday life are 
definable in terms of overt behavior, I shall ensure that this is true of the 
concepts that I shall employ." And it must be confessed that 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
185
many  behavioristically  oriented  psychologists  have  believed  themselves 
committed to this austere program of concept formation. 
    Now I think it reasonable to say that,  thus conceived, the behavioristic 
program would be unduly restrictive. Certainly, nothing in the nature of sound 
scientific  procedure  requires  this  self-denial.  Physics,  the  methodological 
sophistication of which has so impressed -- indeed, overly impressed -- the 
other sciences, does not lay down a corresponding restriction on its concepts, 
nor has chemistry been built in terms of concepts explicitly definable in terms 
of the observable properties and behavior of chemical substances. The point I 
am  making  should  now  be  clear.  The  behavioristic  requirement  that  all 
concepts should be  introduced in terms of a basic vocabulary pertaining to 
overt behavior is compatible with the idea that some behavioristic concepts are 
to be introduced as theoretical concepts. 
    55.  It is essential to note that the theoretical terms of a behavioristic 
psychology are not only not defined in terms of overt behavior, they are also 
not defined  in  terms  of  nerves,  synapses,  neural  impulses,  etc.,  etc.  A 
behavioristic theory of behavior is not, as such, a physiological explanation of 
behavior. The ability of a framework of theoretical concepts and propositions 
successfully to explain behavioral phenomena is logically independent of the 
identification of these theoretical concepts with concepts of neurophysiology. 
What is true -- and this is a logical point -- is that each special science dealing 
with some aspect of the human organism operates within the frame of a certain 
regulative ideal, the ideal of a coherent system in which the achievements of 
each have an intelligible place. Thus, it is part of the Behaviorist's business to 
keep an eye on the total picture of the human organism which is beginning to 
emerge. And if the tendency to premature identification is held in check, there 
may be considerable heuristic value in speculative attempts at integration; 
though, until recently, at least, neurophysiological speculations in behavior 
theory  have  not  been  particularly  fruitful.  And  while  it  is,  I  suppose, 
noncontroversial that when the total scientific picture of man and his behavior 
is in, it will involve some identification of concepts in behavior theory with 
concepts pertaining to the functioning of anatomical structures, it should not be 
assumed  that  behavior  theory  is  committed  ab  initio to  a  physiological 
identification  of  all its  concepts,  --  that  its  concepts  are,  so  to  speak, 
physiological from the start. 
    We have, in effect, been distinguishing between two dimensions of the logic 
(or 'methodologic') of theoretical terms: (a) their role in explaining the selected 
phenomena of which the theory is the theory; (b) their role as candidates for 
integration in what we have called the "total picture." These roles are equally 
part of the logic, and hence the 

186
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
"meaning," of theoretical terms. Thus, at any one time the terms in a theory 
will carry with them as part of their logical force that which it is reasonable 
to envisage -- whether schematically or determinately -- as the manner of 
their integration. However, for the purposes of my argument, it will be 
useful to refer to these two roles as though it were a matter of a distinction 
between  what  I  shall  call  pure  theoretical  concepts,  and  hypotheses 
concerning the relation of these concepts to concepts in other specialties. 
What we can say is that the less a scientist is in a position to conjecture 
about the way in which a certain theory can be expected to integrate with 
other specialties, the more the concepts of his theory approximate to the 
status of pure theoretical concepts. To illustrate: We can imagine that 
Chemistry developed  a  sophisticated  and  successful  theory to  explain 
chemical phenomena before either electrical or magnetic phenomena were 
noticed; and that chemists developed as pure theoretical concepts, certain 
concepts  which  it  later  became  reasonable  to  identify  with  concepts 
belonging the framework of electromagnetic theory. 
XV. THE LOGIC OF PRIVATE EPISODES: THOUGHTS
56. With these all too sketchy remarks on Methodological Behaviorism 
under our belts, let us return once again to our fictional ancestors. We are 
now in a position to characterize the original Rylean language in which 
they described themselves and their fellows as not only a  behavioristic 
language, but a behavioristic language which is restricted to the  non-
theoretical vocabulary of a behavioristic psychology. Suppose, now, that in 
the attempt to account for the fact that his fellow men behave intelligently 
not only when their conduct is threaded on a string of overt verbal episodes 
-- that is to say, as we would put it when they "think out loud" -- but also 
when no  detectable  verbal  output is present, Jones  develops a  theory 
according to which overt utterances are but the culmination of a process 
which begins with certain inner episodes. And let us suppose that his model 
for these episodes which initiate the events which culminate in overt verbal 
behavior is that of overt verbal behavior itself. In other words, using the 
language of the model, the theory is to the effect that overt verbal behavior 
is the culmination of a process which begins with "inner speech." 
    It is essential to bear in mind that what Jones means by "inner speech" is 
not to be confused with verbal imagery. As a matter of fact, Jones, like his 
fellows, does not as yet even have the concept of an image. 
    It is easy to see the general lines a Jonesean theory will take. According 
to it the true cause of intelligent nonhabitual behavior is 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
187
"inner speech." Thus, even when a hungry person overtly says "Here is an 
edible object" and proceeds to eat it, the true -- theoretical -- cause of his 
eating, given his hunger, is not the overt utterance, but the "inner utterance of 
this sentence." 
    57. The first thing to note about the Jonesean theory is that, as built on the 
model  of  speech  episodes,  it  carries  over  to  these  inner  episodes  the 
applicability of semantical categories. Thus, just as Jones has, like his fellows, 
been speaking of overt utterances as meaning this or that, or being about this 
or that, so he now speaks of these inner episodes as meaning this or that, or 
being about this or that. 
    The second point to remember is that although Jones' theory involves a 
model, it is not identical with it. Like all theories formulated in terms of a 
model, it also includes a  commentary on the model; a commentary which 
places more or less sharply drawn restrictions on the analogy between the 
theoretical entities and the entities of the model. Thus, while his theory talks of 
"inner speech," the commentary hastens to add that, of course, the episodes in 
question are not the wagging of a hidden tongue, nor are any sounds produced 
by this "inner speech." 
    58. The general drift of my story should now be clear. I shall therefore 
proceed to make the essential points quite briefly: 
    (1) What we must suppose Jones to have developed is the germ of a theory 
which permits many different developments. We must not pin it down to any of 
the more sophisticated forms it takes in the hands of classical philosophers. 
Thus, the theory need not be given a Socratic or Cartesian form, according to 
which  this  "inner  speech"  is  a  function  of  a  separate  substance;  though 
primitive peoples may have had good reason to suppose that humans consist of 
two separate things. 
    (2) Let us suppose Jones to have called these discursive entities thoughts. 
We can admit at once that the framework of thoughts he has introduced is a 
framework of "unobserved," "nonempirical," "inner" episodes. For we can 
point out immediately that in these respects they are no worse off than the 
particles and episodes of physical theory. For these episodes are "in" language-
using animals as molecular impacts are "in" gases, not as "ghosts" are in 
"machines."  They  are  "nonempirical"  in  the  simple  sense  that  they  are 
theoretical -- not definable in observational terms. Nor does the fact that they 
are, as introduced, unobserved entities imply that Jones could not have good 
reason for supposing them to exist. Their "purity" is not a metaphysical purity, 
but so to speak, a methodological purity. As we have seen, the fact that they 
are not introduced as physiological entities does not preclude the possibility 
that at a later methodological stage, they may, so to speak, "turn out" to be 
such. Thus, there are many 

188
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
who would say that it is already reasonable to suppose that these thoughts 
are to be "identified" with complex events in the cerebral cortex func-
tioning along the lines of a calculating machine. Jones, of course, has no 
such idea. 
    (3) Although the theory postulates that overt discourse is the culmination 
of a process which begins with "inner discourse," this should not be taken 
to mean that overt discourse stands to "inner discourse"  as voluntary 
movements stand to intentions and motives. True, overt linguistic events 
can be produced  as means to ends. But serious errors creep into the 
interpretation of both language and thought if one interprets the idea that 
overt linguistic episodes express thoughts, on the model of the use of an 
instrument. Thus, it should be noted that Jones' theory, as I have sketched 
it, is perfectly compatible with the idea that the ability to have thoughts is 
acquired in the process of acquiring overt speech and that only after overt 
speech is well established, can "inner speech" occur without its overt 
culmination. 
    (4)  Although  the  occurrence  of  overt  speech  episodes  which  are 
characterizable in semantical terms is explained by the theory in terms of 
thoughts which are  also characterized in semantical terms, this does not 
mean that the idea that overt speech "has meaning" is being analyzed in 
terms of the intentionality of thoughts.It must not be forgotten that the sem-
antical characterization of overt verbal episodes is the primary use of sem-
antical  terms,  and  that  overt  linguistic  events  as  semantically  char-
acterized are the model for the inner episodes introduced by the theory. 
    (5) One final point before we come to the dénouement of the first 
episode in the saga of Jones. It cannot be emphasized too much that 
although these theoretical discursive episodes or thoughts are introduced as 
inner episodes -- which is merely to repeat that they are introduced as 
theoretical episodes -- they are not introduced as immediate experiences. 
Let me remind the reader that Jones, like his Neo-Rylean contemporaries, 
does not as yet have this concept. And even when he, and they, acquire it, 
by a process which will be the second episode in my myth, it will only be 
the philosophers among them who will suppose that the inner episodes 
introduced  for  one  theoretical  purpose--thoughts--must  be  a  subset  of 
immediate experiences, inner episodes introduced for another theoretical 
purpose. 
    59. Here, then, is the dénouement. I have suggested a number of times 
that although it would be most misleading to say that concepts pertaining to 
thinking are theoretical concepts, yet their status might be illuminated by 
means of the contrast between theoretical and non-theoretical discourse. 
We are now in a position to see exactly why this is so. For once our 
fictitious  ancestor,  Jones,  has  developed  the  theory  that  overt  verbal 
behavior is the expression of thoughts, and 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
189
taught his compatriots to make use of the theory in interpreting each other's 
behavior, it is but a short step to the use of this language in self-description. 
Thus, when Tom, watching Dick, has behavioral evidence which warrants the 
use of the sentence (in the language of the theory) "Dick is thinking 'p'" (or 
"Dick is thinking that p"), Dick, using the same behavioral evidence, can say, 
in the language of the theory, "I am thinking 'p' " (or "I am thinking that p.") 
And it now turns out -- need it have? -- that Dick can be trained to give 
reasonably reliable self-descriptions, using the language of the theory, without 
having to observe his overt behavior. Jones brings this about, roughly by 
applauding utterances by Dick of "I am thinking that p" when the behavioral 
evidence strongly supports the theoretical statement "Dick is thinking that p"; 
and by frowning on utterances of "I am thinking that p", when the evidence 
does not support this theoretical statement. Our ancestors begin to speak of the 
privileged access each of us has to his own thoughts.  What began  as a 
language with a purely theoretical use has gained a reporting role. 
    As I see it, this story helps us understand that concepts pertaining to such 
inner episodes as thoughts are primarily and essentially  intersubjective, as 
intersubjective as the concept of a positron, and that the reporting role of these 
concepts -- the fact that each of us has a privileged access to his thoughts -- 
constitutes a dimension of the use of these concepts which is  built on and 
presupposes this intersubjective status. My myth has shown that the fact that 
language  is  essentially  an  intersubjective achievement,  and  is  learned  in 
intersubjective contexts -- a fact rightly stressed in modern psychologies of 
language,  thus  by  B.F.  Skinner,{23} and  by  certain  philosophers,  e.g. 
Carnap,{24} Wittgenstein{25} -- is compatible with the "privacy" of "inner 
episodes." It also makes clear that this privacy is not an "absolute privacy." For 
if it recognizes that these concepts have a reporting use in which one is not 
drawing inferences from behavioral evidence, it nevertheless insists that the 
fact that overt behavior  is evidence for these episodes is built into the very 
logic of these concepts, just as the fact that the observable behavior of gases is 
evidence for molecular episodes is built into the very logic of molecule talk.
{23} Skinner, B.F., "The Operational Analysis of Psychological Terms," Psychological 
Review,  52  (1945):270-77.  Reprinted  in  H.  Feig]  and  M.  Brodbeck  (eds.), 
Readings in the Philosophy of Science. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1953: 
pp. 585-94. 
{24} Carnap, Rudolph, "Psychologie in Physicalischer Sprache," Erkenntnis, 3 (1933: 
107-42. 
{25} Wittgenstein, Ludwig, Philosophical Investigations. London: Macmillan, 1953

190
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
 
XVI. THE LOGIC OF PRIVATE EPISODES: IMPRESSIONS
60. We are now ready for the problem of the status of concepts pertaining 
to immediate experience. The first step is to remind ourselves that among 
the inner episodes which belong to the framework of thoughts will be 
perceptions, that is to say, seeing that the table is brown, hearing that the 
piano is out of tune, etc. Until Jones introduced this framework, the only 
concepts our fictitious ancestors had of perceptual episodes were those of 
overt verbal reports, made, for example, in the context of looking at an 
object in standard conditions. Seeing that something is the case is an inner 
episode in the Jonesean theory which has as its model reporting on looking 
that something is the case. It will be remembered from an earlier section 
that just as when I say that Dick reported that the table is green, I commit 
myself to the truth of what he reported, so to say of Dick that he saw that 
the table is green is, in part, to ascribe to Dick the idea 'this table is green' 
and to endorse this idea. The reader might refer back to Sections 16 ff. for 
an elaboration of this point. 
    With the enrichment of the originally Rylean framework to include inner 
perceptual  episodes,  I  have  established  contact  with  my  original 
formulation of the problem of inner experience (Sections 22 ff.). For I can 
readily reconstruct in this framework my earlier account of the language of 
appearing, both  qualitative and  existential. Let us turn, therefore to the 
final chapter of our historical novel. By now our ancestors speak a quite 
un-Rylean language. But it still contains no reference to such things as 
impressions,  sensations,  or  feelings  --  in  short,  to  the  items  which 
philosophers lump together under the heading "immediate experiences." It 
will be remembered that we had reached a point at which, as far as we 
could see, the phrase "impression of a red triangle" could only mean 
something like "that state of a perceiver -- over and above the idea that 
there is a red and triangular physical object over there -- which is common 
to those situations in which 
he sees that the object over there is red and triangular; 
the object over there looks to him to be red and triangular; 
there looks to him to be a red and triangular physical object over there." 
Our problem was that, on the one hand, it seemed absurd to say that 
impressions, for example, are theoretical entities, while, on the other, the 
interpretation of impressions as theoretical entities seemed to provide the 
only hope of accounting for the positive content and explanatory power that 
the idea that there are such entities appears to have, and of enabling us to 
understand how we could have arrived at 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
191
this idea. The account I have just been giving of thoughts suggests how this 
apparent dilemma can be resolved. 
    For we continue the myth by supposing that Jones develops, in crude and 
sketchy form, of course, a theory of sense perception. Jones' theory does not 
have to be either well-articulated or precise in order to be the first effective 
step in the development of a mode of discourse which today, in the case of 
some sense-modalities at least, is extraordinarily subtle and complex. We need, 
therefore, attribute to this mythical theory only those minimal features which 
enable it to throw light on the logic of our ordinary language about immediate 
experiences. From this standpoint it is sufficient to suppose that the hero of my 
myth postulates a class of inner -- theoretical -- episodes which he calls, say, 
impressions, and which are the end results of the impingement of physical 
objects and processes on various parts of the body, and, in particular, to follow 
up the specific form in which I have posed our problem, the eye. 
    61. A number of points can be made right away: 
   (1) The entities introduced by the theory are states of the perceiving subject, 
not a class of particulars. It cannot be emphasized too strongly that the 
particulars  of  the  common-sense  world  are  such  things  as  books,  pages, 
turnips, dogs, persons, noises, flashes, etc., and the Space and Time -- Kant's 
Undinge -- in which they come to be. What is likely to make us suppose that 
impressions are introduced as particulars is that as in the case of thoughts, this 
ur-theory is formulated in terms of a model. This time the model is the idea of 
a domain of "inner replicas" which, when brought about in standard conditions, 
share the perceptible characteristics of their physical source. It is important to 
see  that  the  model  is  the  occurrence  "in"  perceivers  of  replicas,  not  of 
perceivings of replicas. Thus, the model for an impression of a red triangle is a 
red and triangular replica, not a seeing of a red and triangular replica. The 
latter alternative would have the merit of recognizing that impressions are not 
particulars. But, by misunderstanding the role of models in the formulation of a 
theory, it mistakenly assumes that if the entities of the model are particulars, 
the theoretical entities which are introduced by means of the model must 
themselves be particulars -- thus overlooking the role of the commentary. And 
by taking the model to be seeing a red and triangular replica, it smuggles into 
the language of impressions the logic of the language of thoughts. For seeing is 
a cognitive episode which involves the framework of thoughts, and to take it as 
the model is to give aid and comfort to the assimilation of impressions to 
thoughts, and thoughts to impressions which, as I have already pointed out, is 
responsible  for  many of  the  confusions  of  the  classical  account  of  both 
thoughts and impressions. 

192
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
    (2)  The  fact that  impressions are  theoretical  entities  enables us  to 
understand how they can be  intrinsically characterized -- that is to say, 
characterized by something more than a definite description, such as "entity 
of the kind which has as its standard cause looking at a red and triangular 
physical object in such and such circumstances" or "entity of  the kind 
which is common to the situations in which there looks to be a red and 
triangular physical object." For although the predicates of a theory owe 
their meaningfulness to the fact that they are logically related to predicates 
which apply to the observable phenomena which the theory explains, the 
predicates  of  a  theory  are  not  shorthand  for  definite  descriptions  of 
properties in terms of these observation predicates. When the kinetic theory 
of gases speaks of molecules as having mass, the term "mass" is not the 
abbreviation of a definite description of the form "the property which..." 
Thus, "impression of a red triangle" does not simply mean "impression 
such as  is  caused  by  red  and  triangular  physical objects  in  standard 
conditions," though it is true --  logically true -- of impressions of red 
triangles that they are of that sort which is caused by red and triangular 
objects in standard conditions. 
    (3) If the theory of impressions were developed in true logistical style, 
we could say that the intrinsic properties of impressions are "implicitly 
defined" by the postulates of the theory, as we can say that the intrinsic 
properties  of  subatomic  particles  are  "implicitly  defined"  by  the 
fundamental principles of subatomic theory. For this would be just another 
way of saying that one knows the meaning of a theoretical term when one 
knows (a) how it is related to other theoretical terms, and (b) how the 
theoretical system as a whole is tied to the observation language. But, as I 
have pointed  out,  our  ur-behaviorist  does  not  formulate  his theory in 
textbook style. He formulates it in terms of a model. 
    Now the model entities are entities which do have intrinsic properties. 
They are, for example, red and triangular wafers. It might therefore seem 
that the theory specifies the intrinsic characteristics of impressions to be the 
familiar perceptible qualities of physical objects and processes. If this were 
so, of course, the theory would be ultimately incoherent, for it would 
attribute  to  impressions  --  which  are  clearly  not  physical  objects  -- 
characteristics  which, if our argument to date is sound,  only physical 
objects can have. Fortunately, this line of thought overlooks what we have 
called  the  commentary  on  the  model,  which  qualifies,  restricts  and 
interprets the analogy between the familiar entities of the model and the 
theoretical entities which are being introduced. Thus, it would be a mistake 
to suppose that since the model for the impression of a red triangle is a red 
and triangular wafer, the impression itself is a red and triangular wafer. 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
193
What can be said is that the impression of a red triangle is analogous, to an 
extent which is by no means neatly and tidily specified, to a red and triangular 
wafer. The essential feature of the analogy is that visual impressions stand to 
one  another  in  a  system  of  ways  of  resembling  and  differing  which  is 
structurally similar to the ways in which the colors and shapes of visible 
objects resemble and differ. 
    (4) It might be concluded from this last point that the concept of the 
impression of a red triangle is a "purely formal" concept, the concept of a 
"logical form" which can acquire a "content" only by means of "ostensive 
definition." One can see why a philosopher might want to say this, and why he 
might conclude that in so far as concepts pertaining to immediate experiences 
are  intersubjective, they are "purely structural," the "content" of immediate 
experience being incommunicable. Yet this line of thought is but another 
expression  of the Myth of the Given. For  the theoretical  concept of the 
impression of a red triangle would be no more and no less "without content" 
than  any theoretical  concept.  And while, like  these, it  must belong to  a 
framework which is logically connected with the language of observable fact, 
the  logical  relation  between  a  theoretical  language  and  the  language  of 
observable  fact has nothing to  do  with the  epistemological fiction  of an 
"ostensive definition." 
    (5) The impressions of Jones' theory are, as was pointed out above, states of 
the perceiver, rather than particulars. If we remind ourselves that these states 
are  not introduced  as physiological states  (see Section  55),  a number of 
interesting questions arise which tie in with the reflections on the status of the 
scientific picture of the world (Sections 39-44 above) but which, unfortunately, 
there is space only to adumbrate. Thus, some philosophers have thought it 
obvious that we can expect that in the development of science it will become 
reasonable to identify all the concepts of behavior theory with definable terms 
in  neurophysiological theory, and  these,  in  turn,  with  definable  terms in 
theoretical physics. It  is important to realize that the second step of this 
prediction, at least, is either a truism or a mistake. It is a truism if it involves a 
tacit redefinition of "physical theory" to mean "theory adequate to account for 
the observable behavior of any object (including animals and persons) which 
has physical properties." While if "physical theory" is taken in its ordinary 
sense of "theory adequate to explain the observable behavior of physical 
objects," it is, I believe, mistaken. 
    To  ask  how  impressions fit  together  with  electromagnetic  fields,  for 
example, is to ask a mistaken question. It is to mix the framework of molar 
behavior theory with the framework of the micro-theory of physical objects. 
The proper question is, rather, "What would correspond in a micro-theory of 
sentient organisms to molar concepts 

194
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
pertaining to impressions?" And it is, I believe, in answer to this question 
that one would come upon the  particulars which sense-datum theorists 
profess to find (by analysis) in the common-sense universe of discourse (cf. 
Section 23). Furthermore, I believe that in characterizing these particulars, 
the micro-behaviorist would be led to say something like the following: "It 
is such particulars which (from the standpoint of the theory) are being 
responded to by the organism when it looks to a person as though there 
were a red and triangular physical object over there." It would, of course, 
be incorrect to say that, in the ordinary sense, such a particular is red or 
triangular.  What  could be  said,{26}  however,  is  that  whereas  in  the 
common-sense  picture  physical objects  are  red  and  triangular  but  the 
impression  "of"  a  red  triangle  is  neither  red  nor  triangular,  in  the 
framework of this micro-theory, the theoretical counterparts of sentient 
organisms are Space-Time worms characterized by two kinds of variables: 
(a) variables which also characterize the theoretical counterparts of merely 
material objects; (b) variables peculiar to sentient things; and that these 
latter  variables  are  the  counterparts  in  this  new  framework  of  the 
perceptible  qualities  of  the  physical  objects  of  the  common-sense 
framework. It is statements such as these which would be the cash value of 
the idea that "physical objects aren't really colored; colors exist only in the 
perceiver," and that "to see that the facing surface of a physical object is 
red and triangular is to  mistake a red and triangular sense content for a 
physical object with a red and triangular facing side." Both these ideas 
clearly treat what is really a speculative philosophical critique (see Section 
41) of the common-sense framework of physical objects and the perception 
of physical objects in the light of an envisaged ideal scientific framework, 
as though it were a matter of distinctions which can be drawn within the 
common-sense framework itself. 
    62. This brings me to the final chapter of my story. Let us suppose that 
as his final service to mankind before he vanishes without a trace, Jones 
teaches his theory of perception to his fellows. As before in the case of 
thoughts,  they  begin  by  using  the  language  of  impressions  to  draw 
theoretical  conclusions  from  appropriate  premises.  (Notice  that  the 
evidence for theoretical statements in the language of impressions will 
include such introspectible inner episodes as its looking to one as though 
there were a red and triangular physical object over there, as well as overt 
behavior.) Finally he succeeds in training them to make a reporting use of 
this language. He trains them, that is, to say "I have 
{26} For a discussion of some logical points pertaining to this framework, the 
reader should consult the essay, "The Concept of Emergence," by Paul E. 
Meehl and  Wilfrid Sellars,  in  Volume I of the  Minnesota  Studies in the 
Philosophy  of  Science,  edited  by  Herbert  Feigl  and  Michael  Scriven. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1956: pp. 239-52. 
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
195
the impression of a red triangle" when, and only when, according to the theory, 
they are indeed having the impression of a red triangle. 
    Once again the myth helps us to understand that concepts pertaining to 
certain inner episodes -- in this case  impressions -- can be primarily and 
essentially  intersubjective,  without  being  resolvable  into  overt  behavioral 
symptoms,  and  that  the  reporting  role  of  these  concepts,  their  role  in 
introspection,  the  fact  that  each  of  us  has  a  privileged  access  to  his 
impressions, constitutes a dimension of these concepts which is built on and 
presupposes their role in intersubjective discourse. It also makes clear why the 
"privacy" of these episodes is not the "absolute privacy" of the traditional 
puzzles. For, as in the case of thoughts, the fact that overt behavior is evidence 
for these episodes is built into the very logic of these concepts as the fact that 
the observable behavior of gases is evidence for molecular episodes is built 
into the very logic of molecule talk. 
    Notice that what our "ancestors" have acquired under the guidance of Jones 
is not just another language" -- a "notational convenience" or "code" -- which 
merely enables them to say what they can already say in the language of 
qualitative  and  existential  looking.  They have  acquired  another  language, 
indeed, but it is one which, though it rests on a framework of discourse about 
public objects in Space and Time, has an autonomous logical structure, and 
contains an explanation of, not just a code for, such facts as that there looks to 
me to be a red and triangular physical object over there. And notice that while 
our "ancestors" came to notice impressions, and the language of impressions 
embodies a "discovery" that there are such things, the language of impressions 
was no more tailored to fit  antecedent noticings of these entities than the 
language of molecules was tailored to fit antecedent noticings of molecules. 
    And the spirit of Jones is not yet dead. For it is the particulars of the micro-
theory discussed in Section 61 (5) which are the solid core of the sense 
contents and sense fields of the sense-datum theorist. Envisaging the general 
lines of that framework, even sketching some of its regions, he has taught 
himself to play with it (in his study) as a report language. Unfortunately, he 
mislocates the truth of these conceptions, and, with a modesty forgivable in 
any but a philosopher, confuses his own creative enrichment of the framework 
of empirical knowledge, with an analysis of knowledge as it was. He construes 
as data the particulars and arrays of particulars which he has come to be able 
to observe, and believes them to be antecedent objects of knowledge which 
have somehow been in the framework from the beginning. It is in the very act 
of taking that he speaks of the given. 
    63. I have used a myth to kill a myth -- the Myth of the Given. But 

196
EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND
is my myth really a myth? Or does the reader not recognize Jones as Man 
himself in the middle of his journey from the grunts and groans of the cave 
to the subtle and polydimensional discourse of the drawing room, the 
laboratory, and the study, the language of Henry and William James, of 
Einstein and of the philosophers who, in their efforts to break out of 
discourse to an arche beyond discourse, have provided the most curious 
dimension of all. 

