
The New Phrenology 
/ 

Life and Mind: Philosophical Issues in Biology and Psychology 
Kim Sterelny and Rob Wilson, editors 
Cycles of Contingency: Developmental Systems and Evolution 
Susan Oyama, Paul E. Griffiths, and Russell D. Gray, editors, 2000 
Coherence in Thought and Action 
Paul Thagard, 2000 
Norms of Nature: Naturalism and the Nature of Functions 
Paul Sheldon Davies, 2001 
The New Phrenology: The Limits of Localizing Cognitive Processes in 
the Brain 
William R. Uttal, 2001 
The New Phrenology 
The Limits of Localizing Cognitive Processes in the 
Brain 
William R. Uttal 
A Bradford Book 
The MIT Press 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 
London, England 

© 2001 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any 
electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or informa­
tion storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher. 
This book was set in Sabon by Wellington Graphics, Westwood, MA, and was 
printed and bound in the United States of America. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Uttal, William R. 
The new phrenology : the limits of localizing cognitive processes in the 
brain / William R. Uttal. 
p. cm.-(Life and mind : philosophical issues in biology and 
psychology ) 
"A Bradford book." 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-262-21017-7 (he. : alk. paper) 
1 .  Brain-Localization of functions. 2. Cognitive neuroscience. 
3. Brain-Imaging. 1. Title. II. Life and mind. 
QP385 .U86 2001 
612.8'2-dc21 
00-052534 
For Mitchan 

Contents 
Preface 
IX 
Acknowledgments 
XVll 
1 On Localizing Cognitive Processes: The Problem 
1 
2 The Technologies 
29 
3 Is a Taxonomy or Even a Lexicon of Cognitive Processes 
Possible? 
89 
4 Technical and Conceptual Problems 
147 
5 Summary and Conclusions 
205 
Appendix A: The Great Questions of Scientific Psychology 
221 
Appendix B: A Comment on the Zeitgeist 
227 
References 
233 
Index 
249 

Preface 
It has long been my concern that, in our efforts to exorcise speculative 
and philosophical considerations from what we all want to be an "objec­
tive" empirical science, psychologists may have overlooked an important 
methodological tool-critical analysis of the fundamental concepts, axi­
oms, assumptions, and premises that underlie our day-to-day empirical 
research. 
Progress in our science, using whatever criterion of progress one 
chooses, has been based on largely unarticulated premises and goals. Al­
though our goals are instantiated in a series of questions that should 
guide and direct our experimental programs, to the degree that we have 
overemphasized experimental methodology and technique, we may have 
smothered essential consideration of the root motives and assumptions 
of our science. 
It is for this reason that I set out to write a series of monographs that 
deal with the fundamental issues of psychological science. (Although I 
am sure all psychologists have their special lists, I have included my own 
as appendix A.) Two monographs served as precursors of this project. 
The first (Uttal, 1998) analyzed a question fundamental to psychological 
research-Can psychologists reduce their observations to neural, cogni­
tive, or computational components? The second monograph (Uttal, 
2000a) considered a closely related but distinct question-Are mental 
processes accessible, that is, can they be measured or inferred from psy­
chological experiments? 
The present book takes aim at a third, fundamental question in psy­
chology-Can psychological processes be localized, that is, can they 
be adequately defined and isolated in a way that permits them to be 

x 
Preface 
associated with particular brain regions? I have been interested in the 
question of localization for many years. In Uttal, 1978, I extensively ex­
plored what the empirical findings obtained with techniques such as di­
rect electrical recording and extirpative surgery had to say about the 
localization of psychological processes in the brain. 
In recent years, noninvasive tomographic techniques using radioactiv­
ity, X rays, or magnetic fields, and even more exotic methods have al­
lowed us to peer into the human brain while it is actively engaged in 
mental activities. As computational procedures have improved our abil­
ity to extract three-dimensional images of brain anatomy and, some have 
argued, perhaps even of mental functions, more and more psychologists 
have applied these powerful procedures to the localization question. It 
has become increasingly clear that the preliminary skeptical concerns I 
expressed in 1978 needed to be reconsidered in the light of findings made 
with these extraordinary technical innovations. 
As in the first two books of this series, my approach is intended to be 
critical, but not, I hope, iconoclastic. I still choose to be a constructive 
gadfly and have attempted to be evenhanded in addressing the localiza­
tion problem in this new era. Clearly, the studies based on the 
tomographic analysis of brain localization represent a work in progress. 
Just as clearly, we are only on the shore of a vast sea of the unknown as 
we attempt to deal with arguably the most complex organ that has ever 
existed. My prediction is that we are not likely in the near term to answer 
completely any of the questions raised in this series. Indeed, in many 
cases, it is entirely possible there may be insurmountable practical and 
"in principle" barriers to achieving complete understanding of the rela­
tions between brain, mind, and behavior. Nevertheless, as we strive to 
understand these relations, we must make every effort to find out what 
can and cannot be accomplished so that we do not misdirect our atten­
tion away from plausible and achievable scientific goals in our pursuit of 
fantastic and unachievable ones. 
The recent development of the computerized tools that permit 
noninvasive studies of the physiology and anatomy of the central nerv­
ous system has stimulated an enormous amount of interest and labora­
tory research in what has come to be called "cognitive neuroscience." 
Much of this work on the localization of psychological functions in the 
Preface 
xi 
brain seems to have plunged off the rock of scientific certainty into a lake 
of unknowns with an exuberance typical of a science suddenly provided 
a powerful new tool-or, perhaps, of a child given a new toy. Unfortu­
nately, all too often inadequate attention has been paid to the concep­
tual, logical, and technical considerations that should accompany any 
scientific undertaking. It therefore falls to at least a few of us to make an 
extra effort to examine the situation before another exciting new tech­
nology prompts others of us to take yet another such plunge. 
Indeed, so abundant, provocative, and perplexing have the findings of 
the new technologies and procedures been that it is time to step back and 
ask fundamental questions. What does it all mean? What can be accom­
plished? What are the capabilities of this particular device or procedure? 
What are its limitations? What doors has it opened to us in our quest for 
understanding the relationships among mind, behavior, and the brain? 
Where has it misled us? Which doors may never be opened? Most impor­
tant of all, however, is the question I raised earlier-What are the funda­
mental assumptions underlying the application of these new devices and 
procedures to the localization hypothesis? 
To understand the impact of the new tomographic procedures, we 
must examine the history of previous procedural developments (e.g., 
studies of the gross anatomy of the brain and skull, the electroencephalo­
graph, and the stimulus-evoked cortical response) and consider where 
they led reductively oriented physiological psychologists as they have 
metamorphosized into cognitive neuroscientists. We must also consider 
what our definitions of psychological functions and processes themselves 
signify. It is here that the greatest impediments to understanding the rela­
tion between psychological constructs and brain mechanisms actually lie. 
We must critically examine the new technologies and procedures them­
selves. So complex and sophisticated are the tomographic devices used to 
look at the central nervous system that what first seems obvious may, on 
closer examination, turn out to be far from obvious. Users unfamiliar 
with the technical details of these devices are susceptible to subtle, and 
sometimes not so subtle, misinterpretations of what they see. It is there­
fore only appropriate that we consider the technical strengths and weak­
nesses of the devices as we examine the physiology and psychology of the 
localization enterprise. Researchers well removed from the laboratory 

XII 
Preface 
and the new equipment may be even more likely to overstate the implica­
tions of findings made with such equipment. 
We must also examine the logic of the experimental protocols used in 
localization studies. We must make sure that the findings are true and 
valid measures of the nervous system's structure and function. It is all too 
easy to create "hypothetical constructs" and "just so" stories driven 
more by an intrinsic human urge to "explain" or stimulated by the meth­
odology of an experiment itself than by the true psychobiology of the 
brain-mind. 
These are the goals of this book: to examine the definitional, concep­
tual, methodological, technical, and logical foundations of the extensive 
current efforts to localize psychological functions in the central nervous 
system. So complex are the brain and the concepts, research paradigms, 
and laboratory equipment of psychology that the opportunities for mis­
understanding and misinterpretation are enormous. Only by carefully 
analyzing all dimensions of this complex science can we arrive at even 
preliminary answers to the questions posed earlier. 
Beyond goals, there is a deeper purpose in my writing this book. Un­
like many of the "normal" or "natural" sciences, which seem to grow 
both vertically and laterally-to pyramid-psychology seems to grow 
only laterally. Scholars from the time of William James ( 1 892) including 
Hammond, Hamm, and Grassia ( 1 986), Neisser (1976), Koch ( 1 959), 
and Tulving ( 1979) have noted this characteristic of our science. 
As James ( 1 892, p. 468) lamented: 
A string of raw facts; a little gossip and wrangle about opinions; a little class­
ification and generalization on the mere descriptive level; a strong prejudice that 
we have states of mind, and that our brain conditions them; but not a single law 
in the sense in which physics shows us laws, not a single proposition from which 
any consequence can be causally deduced. We don't even know the terms be­
tween which the elementary laws would obtain if we had them. This is no sci­
ence, it is only the hope of a science. 
Almost a century later, Tulving ( 1979, p. 3) would say of the psychology 
of learning: "After a 100 years of laboratory-based study of memory, we 
still do not seem to possess any concepts that the majority of workers 
would consider necessary or important." Lockhead ( 1992, p. 555), 
speaking of psychophysical scaling, came to a similar conclusion: 
Preface 
xiii 
Any underlying, true psychophysical scale can only appear in the data as a will­
o'-the-wisp with no basis to decide whether the observed scale is the true scale. 
Except for its esthetic appeal, which is considerable, there seems to be little rea­
son to expect a fixed relation between behavior and the amount of energy in 
some attribute of a stimulus, and little reason to expect to be able to demonstrate 
such a function, should one exist. 
The tendency for highly specific microtheories and narrowly con­
strained findings to proliferate in psychology is as understandable as it is 
pervasive and bewildering. The subject matter of this science is far more 
complex and multivariate than perhaps any other. Orderly taxonomies 
are rare; universal or even broad-ranging theories are nearly nonexistent. 
Indeed, those who aspire to such universality (e.g., Newell, 1990; Ander­
son and Lebiere, ( 1998) are more likely to offer programming or strate­
gic approaches or descriptive simulations than explanatory "theories" of 
psychological processes. 
It is not entirely clear how one can overcome this basic difficulty, given 
the nature of the subject matter, but it is likely that some steps toward 
clarifying scientific psychology can be made if we tease out the goals 
common to all its experimental and theoretical efforts. This means tak­
ing a meta psychological stance and seeking fundamentals and common­
alities. One way to do this is to ask some basic questions. What are we 
doing? What do we now know? To make at least a preliminary stab at 
answering some of these questions is the main purpose of this series of 
books. 
I approach this work with considerable trepidation. The scientific com­
munity at large has become so thoroughly enamored of the localization 
hypothesis that any single critical voice is likely to be drowned in the sea 
of current enthusiasm. (As I show in appendix B, the zeitgeist is particu­
larly constraining in this research arena.) 
One has only to examine the contents of one of the world's leading 
scientific journals-Science-to appreciate the impact and popularity of 
the current effort to use imaging techniques to locate psychological 
processes. Most of the articles from 1998 to mid-2000 that deal 
with mental processing in any way include some fMRI or imaging data. 
Conventional psychophysical studies based on purely behavioral obser­
vations are almost completely absent. Moreover, some of our most 

XIV 
Preface 
preStigIOus universlties have replaced traditional cognitive (previously 
known as "experimental" )  psychology programs with cognitive neuro­
science programs that completely accept both the assumptions and 
the findings of the search for the cerebral localization of hypothetical 
cognitive modules with imaging techniques. Researchers originally 
trained to exercise the classic psychophysical and cognitive skills are now 
working with devices they could not even have imagined in their gradu­
ate school days. The speed with which the imaging approach has taken 
over the activity of many cognitive psychologists and the number of re­
searchers (as well as the enormous resources) committed to it suggests 
that any criticism of this approach is likely to encounter severe 
countercriticism. Indeed, even when important critical analyses have 
crept into the literature, they have been largely muted or ignored. Never­
theless, I have come to the point of view expressed here after a consider­
able amount of study, and my voice is not a solitary one. In particular, I 
note the important critique of cognitive neuropsychology offered by 
Farah ( 1 994). Although the alternative she proposed (parallel distributed 
processing) is as flawed as, and perhaps explains even less than, the local­
ization hypothesis, her criticism of the prevailing "locality" assumption 
was cogent and effective. Others, such as Sekuler ( 1 994, p. 79), would 
seem to agree: 
After all, psychology now assumes a brain that is barely recognizable as the inter­
active one that Farah [1994] urges us to embrace. If Farah's admonitions hold for 
fields outside neuropsychology, and I think they do, much of psychology plainly 
needs straightening out. 
Clearly, we are dealing with a problem of fundamental importance to 
our science. My hope, therefore, is that this volume, and others like it, 
will lead us at least to reconsider some of psychology's fundamental is­
sues, if not to resolve them. To proceed without inspecting our most ba­
sic assumptions is likely to prove fatal in the long run, particularly if the 
approach taken turns out to be misguided in some fundamental way. If 
this critique should eventually be deemed valid, so much the better, al­
though I do not expect to see a counterrevolution in my time. I happily 
accept the fact that there is no "killer" argument that will (or even 
should until we learn just what positive advantage there is to be gained 
from the new tomographic approaches) lead to the immediate cessation 
Preface 
XV 
of studies that seek to correlate brain actlVlty imaging and what are 
purely psychological responses. What I hope, at a minimum, is that there 
will be a pause to consider some of the doubts a few of us have about this 
headlong plunge into a research field that is fraught, to say the least, with 
some serious conceptual and practical problems. 
Finally, nothing in any of my books has been intended to discourage 
explorations and experimentation in either neuroscience or psychology. 
Authenticating the achievements of the former and satisfying the need 
for understanding in the latter should both be high-priority goals. It is 
only the building of fragile and ill-conceived bridges between the two 
fields that is problematic. In "simpler" scientific fields, reductionist ap­
proaches have worked and will continue to contribute to our under­
standing of the world around us. In psychology, however, the 
multidimensional complexity of the brain and behavior poses constraints 
that may never be overcome. 

Acknowledgments 
Much of what I have to say has been stimulated by sources other than 
those I can cite or recall. A student's question, a colleague's comment, a 
paragraph or phrase read in a context now forgotten, a deep insight ex­
pressed by a scholar far more capable than I-all have stimulated my 
thinking in ways that I can no longer trace. Similarly, an absurdity in an­
other writer's presentation or even a poorly designed and interpreted ex­
periment may have strongly influenced my point of view. To all these 
now invisible sources, I am grateful. 
There are those, however, whom I can acknowledge and thank by 
name. I especially want to thank my Arizona State University colleague 
Peter Killeen, who has been a wise guide and sometimes moderating 
influence on my tendency to be hyper skeptical. Peter has introduced me 
to ideas I would not otherwise have encountered and has demonstrated a 
critical judgment I wish I could more fully emulate. Guy Van Orden, an­
other ASU colleague, has also been a staunch supporter, advisor, and 
leader in the small community of those of us who want at least to raise 
fundamental issues. ASU's Daryl Kipke and Edward Castaneda also con­
tributed important advice at key points in the development of this book. 
S. J. Klein, a dedicated student and teacher of the history of psychology, 
did me the courtesy of reading and commenting on chapter 3 and helped 
clarify some of the worst of my obfuscations. 
I also want to thank Cyril "Danny" Latimer of the Department of Psy­
chology of the University of Sydney (Australia) for making possible my 
stay there as visiting scholar in 1999, one of the most enjoyable and in­
tellectually productive times in my career, and a time when much work 
was done on the present book. To Danny and his colleagues, especially 

XVl1l 
Acknowledgments 
Rosalyn Markham and Olga Katchan, many thanks for making my visit 
both personally and professionally so worthwhile. 
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press has been extremely 
supportive of a book that runs counter to their usual list. I am especially 
grateful to Katherine Almeida, who took over the production of this 
book late in its development. An anonymous copy editor did a marvel­
ous job of "getting into my head" and, as a result, sharpening both my 
language and the conceptual structure of this work. 
Finally, everything I have accomplished has depended on the support I 
received in so many different ways from my bride of all these many 
years. To Mitchan, as ever, this book is lovingly dedicated. 
Thirty years ago, except for certain seemingly outdated schools of neurologists, 
the modular view of the cognitive system that cognitive neuropsychology offers 
would have seemed as implausible as that provided by Gall. The answers that 
have been given for a variety of phenomena discovered and documented over 
many aspects of perception, language, memory, and cognition might not survive. 
The range of conceptual problems that these phenomena pose will, however, re­
main. When they can be adequately answered, psychology will have become a 
sCience. 
-Tim Shallice, From Neuropsychology to Mental Structure 
Although Spinoza employed terms like "reason," "emotion," "intellect," will," 
he-like the modern psychologist-warned against the error of regarding such 
nouns as references to distinct entities or separate faculties. Instead he regarded 
them as convenient verbal labels for concepts or universals obtained by abstrac­
tion from the realities of individual experience. As abstractions they have no real 
existence, any more than whiteness apart from white objects or circularity apart 
from circular objects. To endow them with real existence involves the fallacy of 
reification, as it has to be called. 
-David Ballin Klein, A History of Scientific Psychology 

1 
On Localizing Cognitive Processes: The 
Problem 
The goal of this book is to consider relevant findings and theory and to 
make a tentative step or two toward answering the great question of lo­
calization theory-Can psychological processes be adequately defined 
and isolated in a way that permits them to be associated with particular 
brain locales? Embedded within this question are three subquestions: 
1 .  Can the mind be subdivided into components, modules, or parts? 
2. Does the brain operate as an equipotential mass or is it also divisible 
into interacting but separable functional units? 
3. Can the components, modules, or parts of the mind, if they exist in 
some valid psychobiological sense, be assigned to localized portions of 
the brain? 
None of these questions is new. Rather, they have been at the heart of 
much of scientific psychology's research throughout its history. Indeed, 
historically, the respective answers to subquestion 1 are the bases of 
many of psychology's great schisms. For example, "mentalisms" assume 
cognitive analyzability and "behaviorisms" typically eschew it. Given the 
fundamental conceptual importance of these issues, it is surprising that 
questions of this kind have seldom been studied in detail in recent years. 
In particular, modern cognitive neuropsychology bases a substantial 
amount of current research on the a priori assumption that affirmative 
answers to all three of these subquestions are justified. 
This is not to assert that the ultimate answer to any of the subquestions 
is going to be either absolutely negative or totally affirmative. As we shall 
see, extreme and sometimes radical answers to questions of this magni­
tude and seriousness have eventually been cast aside in favor of subtle 

2 
Chapter 1 
compromises or radical new reinterpretations. Nevertheless, it is worth­
while to examine the conceptual grounds on which major efforts and ex­
penditures are being committed. 
The search for understanding the relationship between the material as­
pects of the brain and mental functioning has always been of central im­
portance to scientists attempting to link various aspects of behavior and 
cognition to particular parts or functions of the brain. It has also been 
important to philosophers and others interested in what the findings of 
psychobiological science imply about human nature. 
Localization, however, is only one of what I once identified (Uttal, 
1978) as the three central issues challenging psychobiology. The other 
two are the issue of representation at the neuronal level (how do neural 
networks represent, encode, or instantiate cognitive processes?) and the 
issue of learning (how does our brain adapt to experience, what changes 
occur in its neural networks as a result of experience, and how do these 
changes correspond to externally observed behavior?) 
For several reasons, the localization issue is more amenable to experi­
mental examination and progress than the other two. The causal factors 
that underlie representation and learning are likely to be found in the in­
tricate interactions of neurons that are both minute in size and enormous 
in number. Indeed, as I have argued (Uttal, 1998), for fundamental rea­
sons, representation and learning may be irreducible and intractable. 
On the other hand, at first glance, localization appears to be much 
more tractable. It is studied at the macroscopic level and involves far 
fewer brain "centers" and cognitive modules than does either representa­
tion or learning.1 It has a longer history and is more easily articulated 
than the other two issues. It may even be argued that progress has been 
the greatest, and conceptual ambiguities and technical difficulties most 
completely overcome, in the arena of localization, although this is not to 
suggest in any sense that a complete solution is either apparent or within 
easy reach. (Indeed, as we shall see, the study of localization encounters 
1 .  We cannot, however, automatically determine the organization of even this 
modest number of interacting centers. Indeed, Hilgetag, O'Neill, and Young 
(1996) have shown that the hierarchical structure of the approximately forty vi­
sual brain centers cannot be determined from any amount of data. I discuss their 
argument in greater detail in chapter 4. 
I 
On Localizing Cognitive Processes 
3 
complexities and constraints in some ways no less formidable than those 
encountered in the study of representation and learning.) But even 
though we are arguably closer to some answers in the arena of localiza­
tion than in that of representation or of learning, many technical and 
conceptual pitfalls remain that make a renewed survey of our progress 
toward those answers worthwhile. 
Both by tradition and by law, cognitive neuroscientists have not been 
able to invade the human body to make the direct physiological measure­
ments needed for correlative or linking studies.2 They have, therefore, al­
ways been attracted to any new noninvasive technical development that 
might allow them to correlate human nervous activity with psychological 
findings. In particular, psychologists seeking to localize cognitive func­
tions in the brain have been and are quickly drawn to any noninvasive 
device promising to measure and record any neural or physiological indi­
cator, correlate, sign, or code of those functions. Even distant measures 
such as electrical conductivity of the skin, respiration rate, or pupil diam­
eter were and are used as physiological correlates of mental activity. The 
invention of high-gain electrical amplifying devices permitted develop­
ment of the electroencephalograph (EEG) and of evoked brain potential 
(EBP) methods for recording tiny signals from the human brain by 
Berger ( 1 929) and Dawson ( 1 950, 1954), respectively. Rapidly assimi­
lated into the psychologist's technical arsenal, these techniques provided 
entirely new approaches to the study of the microvolt signals generated 
by aggregate brain activity in intact subjects. 
More recently, cognitive neuroscientists have been drawn to even more 
powerful technologies such as computerized axial tomography (CAT), 
positron-emission tomography (PET), and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) in their attempts to localize cognitive functions in the brain. 
Whatever the nature of the technology, the opportunity to noninvasively 
observe the brain's activity has held an abiding and almost universal 
appeal for cognitive neuroscientists. Whether a particular researcher 
presumed brain signals to be the equivalent or simply an indicator of 
a mental function seemed almost not to matter. The enchantment of 
2. There are other reasons why psychologists have not been able to "open the 
black." For one, the complexity of the brain may make such an "opening" more 
apparent than real. 

4 
Chapter 1 
"looking into" the brain-the incontestable organ of mind-has been 
irresistible. 
Indeed, so seductive and exciting have the new technologies been, and 
so important the promise of understanding at last how the brain is 
related to the mind, that the bedrock issues of the accessibility and 
analyzability of cognitive processes and brain loci have largely been ig­
nored. By addressing those issues, I hope to shed light not only on what 
we know but also on what we can and cannot know about the relation 
between the brain and cognitive processes. 
1 . 1  The Nature o f  the Problem 
However scientifically challenging the search for answers to the brain­
mind problem (how are brain and cognitive functions related?), it is nei­
ther meaningful nor prominent in the thinking of most of the world's 
inhabitants. The very posing of the problem presumes a monistic ontol­
ogy and a nonmystical, realistic, materialistic, and naturalistic philoso­
phy antithetical to the personal philosophies of most people. Regardless 
of how compartmentalized the personal religious beliefs of neuro­
scientists may be, the mere asking of the question by them presupposes 
an implicit acceptance of a monistic ontology and a naturalistic philo­
sophical approach. It implies acceptance of the idea that mind is a 
function, process, or manifestation3 of the information-processing mech­
anisms of the brain. If mind and brain represent two separate domains of 
reality, any attempt to correlate them becomes meaningless. Simply put, 
every study of the localization issue and every theory about it is premised 
on the idea that variations in the psychological domain are in some very 
direct way related to variations in the neurological domain. Make no 
mistake, such directness is tantamount to identity. To believe otherwise is 
to deny a tight enough correlation between brain activity and measures 
of mind to permit drawing any conclusions about the ways in which one 
influences the other. Thus, whatever political, humanistic, theological, or 
3. My redundancy here is intentional. Perhaps, by using three words instead of 
one, I may convey my meaning better than with any single word, loaded as it 
might be with its own connotations. In any event, it is very difficult to discuss 
these ideas without using a mentalist vocabulary. Perhaps redundancy may sub­
stitute for definitional precision. 
On Localizing Cognitive Processes 
5 
personal motives there may be to say otherwise, psychobiology is not 
only an important natural science but also the modern expression of an 
extreme monistic ontology. 
The point of the preceding paragraph is to emphasize that the localiza­
tion of cognitive functions in the brain is not just an esoteric or arcane 
exercise; it expresses a profound and deeply important point of view. It 
should be understood, however, that by championing psychobiology or 
cognitive neuroscience in this manner, I am in no way reneging on my 
promise to provide a critical analysis of its findings and conclusions, as 
well as of its strengths and weaknesses. The practical concerns revolving 
around neuroscientific research make it essential that we understand 
its limitations and misdirections as well as its progress and successes. 
Localization studies, for example, have significant bearing on both 
neurosurgical procedures and popular notions about child development 
and rearing. Inferences drawn from these studies all too easily go far 
beyond the legitimate implications of what has been discovered in 
the laboratory. How many of us have heard about the putative differ­
ences between the "left" and "right" brain and the pedagogic techniques 
that have "followed" from the work on split-brain patients? On the 
other hand, how few of us are familiar with critiques challenging the en­
tire concept of hemispheric specialization? Efron ( 1 990, p. 25), for ex­
ample, suggests that the "thriving 'low tech' cottage industry" of 
psychological research purportedly into the specialized functions of the 
cerebral hemispheres is based on "performance asymmetries" that are, in 
fact, incapable of distinguishing between the separate functions of the 
hemispheres. Thus, left ear-right ear behavioral differences and left 
hemiretina-right hemiretina phenomenal differences, uncritically inter­
preted as differences between left and right cerebral hemisphere func­
tions, cannot be scientifically correlated. To assume that they can leads 
to erroneous scientific theories and practical applications. In the class­
room, similar and perhaps even more dangerously silly notions of "train­
ing a particular part of the brain" reflect a profound ignorance of the 
way in which most parts of the brain interact to produce unified mental 
outcomes. 
The treatment of childhood hyperactivity with drugs of unknown 
mechanism and questionable efficacy (see Valenstein, 1998) also suggests 
that we should step back and examine contemporary views of brain-

6 
Chapter 1 
mind relationships. Whereas the dangers of incorrectly localizing a cog­
nitive function on the neurosurgeon's operating table are self-evident, the 
dangers in the classroom are not so obvious. 
There is thus an enormous chasm between what can and cannot be 
done to solve the localization problem, on the one hand, and what has 
actually been concluded from well-intentioned, but inadequately rea­
soned research, on the other. Whatever specialization and localization 
may occur in the brain, and however isolated the dimensions of a sensory 
code may be in the peripheral transmission pathways, it seems far more 
likely that the mind, consciousness, or self-awareness represent the merg­
ing or binding of many different underlying processes and mechanisms 
into an integrated singular experience. It should be understood that the 
unity of subjective experience therefore contradicts the hypothesis of 
cognitive localization in a fundamental way. Whereas the unity hypothe­
sis emphasizes how the brain puts together mental events, the localiza­
tion hypothesis emphasizes how it takes them apart. There is thus a 
tension between our subjective experience-the most direct evidence of 
our own mental activity-and the analytic assumption on which all of 
the work in the field of localization is premised. The attempt to marshal 
arguments for mental modules and cerebral region associations must as­
sume something that does not seem, at least to a first approximation, to 
be so-that mental activity can be analyzed into separable components. 
Indeed, we shall be exploring the scientific basis of separable mental 
components. 
1.2 A Brief History of Brain Localization 
The earliest associations between various aspects of mental activity (in­
cluding the elusive "consciousness") and parts of the body were most 
likely premised on blood rather than brain.4 To early humans, the most 
immediate correlate of life was blood, whose loss typically led to the ces­
sation of behavior, consciousness, and ultimately, life itself. Although 
some scholars have suggested that the less tangible process of movement 
itself was first thought to be the essential vital ingredient, massive hemor-
4. For a much more complete history of the older aspects of localization theory, 
see Una I 1978. 
On Localizing Cognitive Processes 
7 
rhaging and death were closely associated, whereas the absence of move­
ment during sleep was (almost always) reversed on waking. Certainly, 
the hydraulic theories of later times associated bodily fluids, including 
blood, with the "mind." 
By about 520 B.C.E., however, a historical record appears, one that not 
too surprisingly emphasizes encephalization and an almost modern ap­
preciation of the role of the brain in controlling mental activity. The 
Greek philosopher Alcmaeon of Croton (550?-500? B.C.E.) is said to have 
been the first to propose, on the basis of his own dissections, that the 
brain was the organ responsible for sensation and thought. Notwith­
standing later associations of thought, emotions, and feelings with the 
heart, it is clear that at least a few early scholars and proto scientists 
linked mental processes with brain activity. As our popular Valentine's 
Day "heart"-based language strongly attests, however, even the most 
fundamental and uncontroversial aspects of our science may take what 
seems like an eternity to overcome superstition and ignorance. 
The much better known classical Greek philosopher-physician Hip­
pocrates (460-377 B.C.E.) reverted to more primitive hydraulic theories. 
To "explain" the relation between the body and the mind, he introduced 
the concept of the "pneuma"-the "essence" of life-a mysterious sub­
stance that was supposed to be carried by the blood. On the other hand, 
the first atomist, Democritus (460-362 B.C.E.), argued that life was based 
on "soul atoms" and that those responsible for intellect and emotion re­
sided in the head. Though not explicitly a brain theory, this point of view 
further supported the essential idea of encephalization, a necessary con­
ceptual precursor to cerebralization, and therefore also to the modern lo­
calization theories. 
Surprisingly, by the time of Aristotle (384-322 B.C.E.), the idea that the 
brain was the seat of cognition had been temporarily set aside. This great 
philosopher-naturalist, (whom many credit with some of the earliest 
"scientific" ideas and place among the greatest polymaths of all time) 
thought that the brain was actually only an organ to cool the blood and 
that the nerves were just other tendonlike supporting structures holding 
the body together. 
The basic idea that the brain or head was the seat of our minds never­
theless persisted in Greco-Roman thought, although there was consider-

8 
Chapter 1 
able confusion beyond that vague generalization. The anatomy of the 
brain was not well understood until the beginning of the common era, 
when different scholars and philosophers attributed the key role of men­
tal representation to different parts of the brain. 
The Greek scholar Galen ( 129-199), one of the most important physi­
cians, biologists, and philosophers of the Roman epoch, placed the locus 
of mental activity in the cerebral ventricles. By concentrating, however, 
on the fluids that filled the ventricles rather than on the tissues that sur­
rounded them, he reasserted the fundamentally hydraulic concept that 
permeated much of the thinking of the time. Describing the nerves as 
hollow channels through which these fluids passed, Galen speculated 
that the fluids conveyed information throughout the body. Whereas he 
attributed thinking to the ebb and flow of the fluids, he associated the 
solid portions of the brain with sensory and motor functions, even 
though the gross neuroanatomic research methods available to him 
could provide only the rawest kind of data to support such a conclusion. 
Galen's genius can be also credited with the next great conceptual leap in 
localizing the mechanisms of mind in the head. As far as we know, he 
was the first natural philosopher to separate the major mental functions 
into three distinct categories-the sensory-thought-motor trichotomy. 
This input-association-output trichotomy is still the most generally ac­
cepted and fundamental part of our thinking about brain localization as 
well as the organization of cognitive processes. 
Other parts of Galen's theory persisted until the Renaissance. When 
Andreas Vesalius ( 1514-1564), the great sixteenth-century anatomist 
and artist whose diagrams of the human body still attract so much admi­
ration, dissected peripheral nerves, he was unable to find any channels 
for the Galenic fluids. His dissections therefore directed attention away 
from the ventricles and fluids to the solid portions of the brain. Not until 
twentieth-century neurochemists unraveled the importance of the ionic 
distributions of intracellular and extracellular fluids in neural communi­
cation and integration was the importance of fluids with regard to the 
functioning of the nervous system once again appreciated. Over the 
years, the emphasis has thus shifted from the macroscopic extracellular 
"juices" championed by Galen to the microscopic intracellular ones 
identified by modern biochemists. 
On Localizing Cognitive Processes 
9 
Once the solid portions of the brain were accepted as representing the 
true loci of mental activity, one of the most persistent controversies 
about the nature of brain tissue arose. The debate over whether brain tis­
sue was homogeneous or heterogeneous-whether it was simply the 
amount of brain tissue or the particular part of the brain that accounted 
for the varieties of human experience and behavior-continued until 
modern times. As evidence of the brain's anatomical specialization accu­
mulated, however, the debate finally came to an end: the heterogeneity of 
brain tissue is no longer in doubt. 
That direct evidence of brain anatomy was central to developing theo­
ries of how the brain related to the mind posed a serious problem for sci­
entists and physicians. The human body was considered to be inviolate 
by many religions. During the Middle Ages, the Roman Catholic Church 
at times firmly opposed dissection. Nevertheless, with the emergence of 
the first true universities in Italy around 1200, teacher-physicians such as 
Taddeo Alderotti ( 1223-1303) could once again directly study human 
anatomy and contribute to the accumulating knowledge of the structure 
of the nervous system. This trend culminated in the wonderful drawings 
of Leonardo da Vinci (1473-1506) and Vesalius, during whose careers 
human dissection was tolerated if not officially approved. It is startling 
to recall that these two extraordinary Renaissance men carried out what 
were virtually the first direct anatomical studies of the nervous system 
since Galen's work in the second century. Possible exceptions were the 
ophthalmological studies of Arabic scientists such as Yuhanna ibn 
Masawaih (d. 857), Hunain ibn Ishaq (d. 877), Avicenna (980-1037), 
and perhaps most notably, Alhazen (b. 965). Although it is not certain 
that they actually performed dissections, their writings and drawings 
added immeasurably to modern thought about the visual system. 
The seventeenth and eighteenth centuries abounded with anatomic dis­
coveries about the nervous system. Thomas Willis ( 1622-1675 ), for ex­
ample, classified the cranial nerves; of greatest relevance to the issue of 
localization, Antonio Maria Valsalva ( 1666-1723) discovered that an 
injury to one side of the head caused paralysis on the contralateral side of 
the body. 
Not until the nineteenth century, however, did the data necessary to 
substantiate neural specialization begin to coalesce. Bell ( 1 8 1 1 )  and 

10 
Chapter 1 
Magendie ( 1 822) both correctly determined the sensory role of the dor­
sal spinal roots and the motor role of the ventral ones. War wounds, ac­
cidents, and other fortuitous opportunities led a number of anatomists 
and physiologists to the conclusion that the brain was structurally differ­
entiated, at least to some degree. 
By applying electrical currents to the brain and observing which areas 
produced which motor movements when stimulated, Fritsch and Hitzig 
( 1 870) discovered the motor regions of the brain of a dog. This pioneer­
ing work was shortly followed by studies on the cortex of human beings. 
Taking advantage of a particularly gruesome skull infection that exposed 
the brain of a patient, Bartholow ( 1 874) applied electrical signals from 
an induction coil to one side of the postcentral brain region. He observed 
that this stimulation produced uncontrolled, convulsion-like, movements 
in the leg and arm of the opposite side of the patient's body. Sciamanna 
(1882), in similar experiments, observed that the general region was di­
vided into subregions. By carefully locating his stimulating electrodes 
(and by greatly lowering the current from the drastically high levels used 
by Bartholow), he was able to selectively activate muscles in the mouth 
and hand, among other places. Ferrier ( 1 875), in similar studies on the 
monkey brain, had mapped out which regions of the motor area were 
linked to specific muscular activation in this animal. 
A major breakthrough in the understanding of the brain came when 
the logic of process was reversed. Up to this point, all experiments had 
dealt with the sensitivity of the brain to electrical stimuli. The discovery 
that the brain actually produced electrical currents when activated 
through the natural sensory pathways was an exceedingly important de­
velopment in progress toward the conclusion that the brain was not a 
homogeneous mass but composed of specialized regions. It would lead to 
some of the deepest understanding about the nature of the brain, as well 
as to therapeutic procedures that could not have been imagined in the 
first half of the nineteenth century. 
The discovery of the electrical activity of the brain is attributed to an 
English physician, Richard Caton ( 1 842-1926). Caton had been excited 
by the news from Du Bois-Reymond ( 1848) that a nerve produced an 
electrical current-what Du Bois-Reymond called a "negative varia­
tion." It was Caton's insightful extrapolation of this idea that led him to 
On Localizing Cognitive Processes 
1 1  
determine that the brain also produced an electrical current. In his 
definitive paper (Caton, 1877), he describes how he explored the regions 
of the brain and discovered which were the receiving areas for the several 
sensory modalities. Although not usually given credit for it, he found 
the visual receiving area in three separate species-rabbits, cats, and 
monkeys.s 
At about the same time, Munk ( 1 8 8 1 )  also identified the occipital area 
of the brain as the primary visual cortex. Other specific brain locales had 
previously been associated with speech by Broca ( 1 861 ) and by Wernicke 
( 1 874) on the basis of brain injuries and the resulting speech impedi­
ments that resulted from these trauma. Thus, by 1900, the idea of func­
tional brain localization-namely, that the brain had specialized 
functional areas-was fully ingrained in the protopsychobiology of the 
time. As more and more data accumulated, it became clear that different 
portions of the brain did have different functions. 
Neuroanatomical studies in the twentieth century resulted in a very 
large number of findings that supported the idea that regions of special­
ized function were a major characteristic of the brain. Woolsey ( 1952, 
1961 ) mapped the extent of the somatosensory regions and demarcated 
what are now thought to be the auditory regions of the brain; Tunturi's 
pioneering studies (1952) led to a detailed map of the auditory areas; 
Van Essen ( 1985) and Van Essen, Anderson, and Felleman (1992) 
mapped many of the visual regions. Indeed, with regard to sensory and 
motor functions, it has become indisputable that the brain is not 
equipotential or homogeneous but is made up a cluster of relatively spe­
cialized regions. That it is so with regard to higher-order cognitive func­
tions, however, remains a matter of heated contention, as we shall see. 
We need to distinguish between a nonhomogeneous brain in which 
different regions can influence different mental or behavioral processes, 
on the one hand, and the hypothesized role of these regions as the unique 
locations of the mechanisms underlying these processes, on the other. 
It is the failure to make this distinction that fuels many of the more imag­
inative theories of cognitive localization in the brain. 
5. The complete story of Caton's important work is told in eloquent detail by 
Brazier (1961). 
. 

1 2  
Chapter 1 
It became clear in the twentieth century that large regions of the brain, 
called "association" or "intrinsic areas," seemed not to be associated 
with any particular sensory or motor function. The immediate specula­
tion was that these were the areas where cognitive activities such as 
thinking, perceiving, decision making, problem solving took place­
where the raw sensory information was evaluated, transformed, and 
linked to the motor regions. It is here that much of the crucial and 
most controversial work on brain localization is being done. It is also 
here that proving localization of mental functions becomes most diffi­
cult. For one of many reasons, the anchors to the outside world are least 
defined or measurable in these areas. By contrast, the sensory regions are 
well anchored to the physical energies used as stimuli; the motor regions 
are equally well anchored to the physical mechanics of motor responses 
or even measurable glandular secretions. The mysterious association ar­
eas, however, are associated with constructs, metaphors, mental events, 
and perceptual phenomena that are much less defined or measurable. 
Nevertheless, much has been suggested about the role of these areas. In­
deed, evaluating those suggestions is the central focus of this book. 
The idea that the brain consisted of a very large number of modules 
with distinguishable functions and influences has not always been uncrit­
ically accepted. The major opponent to the idea of localized modules in 
the brain in recent times was Lashley (1942, 1 950), whose studies of 
learning in rats led him to conclude there was no specific brain locus for 
the neural changes (the "engram") that must have occurred during be­
havioral changes produced by experience. Rather, Lashley championed a 
"mass action" or "equipotentiality" theory: it was simply the gross 
amount of cortical tissue remaining after an ablation that correlated with 
the presence or absence of the learned behavior. It is now believed that it 
was the complexity of the process Lashley used to study the learning be­
havior of his rats and the recruitment by that process of so many areas of 
the rat's brain that made the brain's activity with regard to such behavior 
seems equipotential.6 
6. Lashley'S a priori theory that there was no learning area, his complicated ex­
perimental design, and the actual complexity of his data all figured into his erro­
neous conclusions. Similar erroneous conclusions typically arise from setting 
arbitrary thresholds in neurophysiological recording at both the micro- and 
macroscopic level. See also chapter 4. 
On Localizing Cognitive Processes 
13 
Although many psychobiologists no longer subscribe to Lashley's idea 
of mass action, the notion of widely distributed representation of com­
plex cognitive processes still has significant support. For example, the 
definitive and now classic study reported by Olds, Disterhoft, Segal, 
Kornblith, and Hirsch ( 1 972) argued strongly for the idea that even such 
an apparently simple learning paradigm as classical conditioning is capa­
ble of activating widely distributed regions of the brain. 
The controversy between mass action and localized function is not an 
active arena of debate these days. There is little current opinion or theory 
arguing that the brain is homogeneous or equipotential or that it oper­
ates with any semblance of mass action. Rather, contemporary theory 
and research is generally characterized by the assumption of discrete and 
specialized functions in various regions. It is, furthermore, generally 
agreed that mass action, to the degree that anyone might report finding 
it, is actually the result of many brain areas and regions being involved in 
mental and behavioral responses that may be more complicated than 
originally supposed. 
There is thus no question that specialized sensory and motor regions 
exist and that other regions are involved in, if not dedicated to, particu­
lar cognitive processes in some yet-to-be-discovered ways. On the other 
hand, however, it seems clear that the more complex the psychological 
process, the less likely it is that a narrowly circumscribed region uniquely 
associated with that process will be found. Much of the rest of this book 
is aimed at providing support for this assertion. 
Once again, we see that historic controversy between extreme dichot­
omous positions has given way to an intermediate position under 
the weight of new evidence. Thus, however precisely regions can be lo­
calized for the primary sensory and motor processes, the case is not 
so clear when dealing with the complex transformations that occur 
between the sensory inputs and the motor outputs. The integrative 
and complex mental processes encoded in the association areas are 
likely to involve increasingly large numbers of identifiable brain 
nuclei and centers as the task complexity increases, making the brain be­
have in a way that superficially may be difficult to distinguish from mass 
action. 
That more complex mental processes involve large amounts of brain 
tissue has been repeatedly demonstrated by many different techniques 

1 4  
Chapter 1 
examining the localization of psychological processes. For example, in 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies, when subjects 
read, the primary visual regions are most active; when they listen to 
speech, the primary auditory regions are most active; when they speak, 
the classic Broca and Wernicke areas become active. However, when sub­
jects are required to "just think," many other regions, widely distributed 
throughout the association areas of the brain, become active. This oft­
replicated result is independent of the technique used to measure the 
brain's activity-it occurs generally regardless of the method. Indeed, the 
spread of activity into these association areas with increasing cognitive 
complexity tends often to overlap with regions that were initially 
thought to be dedicated to purely sensory or motor functions. 
To conclude, it is universally agreed that the brain is not homogeneous 
but made up of regions that are differentiated by function, and by gross 
anatomy, by cytoarchitectonics (i.e., by microscopic cell types). Contro­
versy over this issue is virtually nil. Why, then, should the localization 
problem still be fraught with argument and contention? The answer to 
this question is evident-it is far easier to identify specialized regions in 
the brain than it is to define the psychological processes we wish to local­
ize-the topic of section 1 .3. 
1 .3 
A Brief History of Cognitive Faculties and Processes 
As we have seen, that the brain can be divided into regions of specialized 
anatomy and function is supported by a plethora of findings from re­
search studies using a wide variety of different techniques. Biophysical 
measurements may be carried out to determine, for example, that electri­
cal stimulation of a certain "motor" region of the brain will produce me­
chanical actions in particular parts of the body. Similarly, direct electrical 
recordings from the surface of the brain clearly show that there are dif­
ferent "sensory" areas that respond maximally when one or another of 
the sense organs is stimulated. Other direct electrical recordings indicate 
that some regions are activated during (and thus must be involved in) 
various behaviorally or verbally reported cognitive functions. Chapter 2 
discusses a number of classical as well as recently developed techniques 
that make it possible to assert confidently that the brain is not homoge-
On Localizing Cognitive Processes 
15 
neous and does not function in a mass-action or equipotential manner. 
On the contrary, it comprises a large number of more or less isola table 
regions that have specialized functions. This much is certain. Much less 
certain is the degree to which these regions interact or are collectively ac­
tivated during even the simplest cognitive process. 
Nor, as we have noted, is there an easy or direct way to define psycho­
logical or cognitive components. It is even more difficult to justify the as­
sumption that complex mental processes are analyzable into cognitive 
components. Although psychologists and their predecessors have in­
voked a myriad of thought processes (perceptions, emotions, feelings, at­
titudes, and memories, among many others), defining such processes 
logically and empirically is in no way as simple or direct as determining 
specialized brain regions. The latter are anchored to a system of physical 
dimen . iIls.that: makes them tangible a;d pa pabte. Not sa 
r t oughts 
and percepts! Indeed, as I have argued (Uttal, 2000a), the accessibility of I 
cognitive processes to researchers or therapists is probably very much 
more limited than is usually appreciated. At best, they can be assayed 
only indirectly with behavioral measures. At worst, behavior is totally 
neutral with regard to the mechanisms and processes that actually under­
lie cognitive activity. Linking behavior to real cognitive components or 
modules is therefore treacherous. Indeed, should the barriers to accessing 
cognitive processes prove insurmountable, it may be impossible. 
The nature of the problem becomes evident whenever attempts are 
made to define psychological terms. Most definitions turn out to be ei­
ther circular or operational. Many mental entities turn out on close in­
spection to be hypothetical constructs (MacCorquodale & Meehl, 1948) 
whose reality is impossible to validate because of the intrinsic inaccessi­
bility of mental processes. Some distinguished neurophysiologists have 
also noted the difficulties encountered when we attempt to access mental 
entities. As Kandel and Kupfermann, ( 1 995, p. 323) have pointed out: 
Once psychologists acknowledged that internal representations are important for 
understanding behavior, they had to come to grips with the stern reality that 
most of what we now conceive of as mental processes are still largely inaccessible 
to experimental analysis. 
Suffice it to say that, however unresolved the problem of accessibility is 
at the present time, the issue itself is intimately related to the companion 

1 6  
Chapter 1 
problem of the definability and reality of the mental processes we seek to 
associate with particular brain regions. In large part, it can be argued 
that the behaviors we measure in psychological laboratories are only dim 
shado;'s of very complex mental and neural processes we barely under­
stand. The further we move from the sensory aspects of cognition (which 
c- -_. 
_-
are well anchored to the dimensions of space, quality, intensity, and time) 
th; more difficult it becomes to find particular brain regions exclusively 
and 'uniquely associated with a particular cognitive process. Without 
such exclusivity and uniqueness, localizing complex cognitive processes 
in particular areas of the brain becomes a much less tractable task. 
("'. 
Although it may seem at first that this extreme difficulty arises solely 
from the limitations of recording techniques or from the brain's inherent 
complexity, I argue that, on the contrary, the preemičpr.o.bleg!jn 
L 
achieving a general solution to the localization issue lies in defining the 
. 
psychological processes and mechanisms for which loci are being sought. 
The ease and {,recision of defining a spatial location of a region in the 
-
-------------
brain contrasts starkly with the difficulty of defining even the simplest of 
psychological constructs. Just consider for a moment what "looking at 
something" may mean. It involves not just the sensory encoding of visual 
signals but, at the least, memory, perceptions, recognition, and semantic 
interpretation in diverse and unknown ways. If our psychological science 
and technology allowed us to parse an act as complex as, say, reading 
into components, perhaps solving the localization problem could move 
ahead more rapidly than it currently does. However, defining and pars­
ing even the simplest mental process is fraught with technical and con­
ceptual difficulties of enormous proportions. What are the dimensions of 
consciousness, of imagination, or of even some of the operationally best 
defined and superficially simplest constructs that emerge as experimental 
outcomes? For example, do the processes often proposed (Donders, 
1 868/1 969; Sternberg, 1969) as the underlying components accounting 
for measured reaction times-stimulus identification, responses selec­
tion, and response evocation-have any independent psychobiological 
reality? Questions like these are not easy to answer despite the prevailing 
$ 
assumption that such components are real entities and not just hypothet-
ical, post hoc constructions. As we shall see repeatedly in chapter 3 and 
as evidenced throughout the history of psychology, some of the putative 
On Localizing Cognitive Processes 
1 7  
mental or cognitive processes suggested as candidates for localization ex­
periments are ephemeral, indeed. 
In chapter 3, I shall argue that not only are psychological entities, as 
named and defined, highly transient; they show no signs of converging 
into any kind of a stable taxonomy. One longs for the precision afforded 
by a concrete anatomical entity anchored to the coordinates of space and 
time. In its place, we are confronted with phenomena such as "meta­
contrast" and "apparent motion" that are paradoxical in both time and 
space and thus elude the kind of precise dimensional measurement neces­
sary for reliable and valid scientific analysis and explanation.7 
r H ,'''- '-I,\ 
There are many ways in which psychologists can be misled to con-=-­
struct a mental entity that has little psychobiolog!eality. In some 
cases, sćch psycholoĈ constructs reflect more the'
-
desig lof an. experi­
ment than the existence of an actual psychobiologiss. For exam­
ple, consider the classic delayed-response experimental paradigm whose 
controlling brain location was sought for and originally found in the 
prefrontal lobes of the brain by Jacobsen ( 1 935). Placing the experimen­
tal animal in what must be considered to be an abnormal and unusual 
environment, this experimental protocol tightly structures the stimuli 
presented and the responses allowed. Does this resemble a natural pro­
cess that may have evolved in conjunction with a particular brain loca­
tion? Could a specific brain locus have evolved in anticipation of this 
particular experimental paradigm? Of course, this question can also be 
asked in several different ways: ( 1 )  Do the responses observed when an 
animal is placed in the delayed-response apparatus assay the function of 
a brain mechanism or of several brain mechanisms that can be localized 
in particular regions of the brain? (2) Do the constrained and observed 
responses in this experiment adequately model some natural behavior? 
My contention is that the brain localization aspects of this experiment 
7. Although many "explanatory" mathematical theories of both metacontrast 
and apparent motion exist, all turn out under scrutiny to be simple, nonreductive 
descriptions of these paradoxical phenomena. It is always possible to distinguish 
between the mathematical assumptions that describe the phenomena and the 
physiological assumptions on which they are based. It turns out that the latter 
are inconsequential in defining the former because totally different physiological 
assumptions can lead to the same mathematical descriptions. 

1 8  
Chapter 1 
should be interpreted differently from the way they usually are. The 
prefrontal region should be considered, not as the "locus" of the mecha­
nisms responsible for the delayed-response behavior, but rather as one 
possible region among many whose manipulation may affect, control, or 
influence that particular behavior. 
Such a restatement represents a totally different conceptualization 
of the localization problem, one that offers, in place of a specific 
function being precisely localized (i.e., instantiated, represented, or en­
coded) in a particular place, the idea of one center contributing to the 
operation of a complex system of nodes and loci that are collectively 
responsible for the behavior. This system may consist of many parts, 
some of which inhibit, some of which excite, and some of which control 
components of the overall process-all having a much closer, if less 
well understood, relationship to a psychobiological reality other 
than the operationally defined experimental paradigm we call "delayed 
responding. " 
As another example, in any experiment that explores "perceptual 
learning," one could just as well be studying learning as perception; it is 
only the particular measurement made that determines whether one 
should publish one's findings in Memory and Cognition or in Perception 
and Psychophysics. However, even when the very same mental processes 
are being studied-only the researcher's emphasis differs-the probabil­
ity of assigning different brain regions to the different aspects of the same 
phenomenon remains frighteningly high. 
Furthermore, the values produced by any given measurement are only 
one manifestation of what is obviously the outcome of a highly complex 
interaction of several different, but intricately interacting processes. 
Which is to say that, again, it may be far more difficult than often as­
sumed to isolate putative components of mental activity from each other. 
The very attempt to do so may beg the question-by assuming as given 
what remains to be shown. 
In attempting to localize any complex cognitive process, there is al­
ways a problem distinguishing whether the associated brain region is 
sufficient or only necessary to elicit a given behavior. For example, 
clearly both the delayed response and the ability to "perceptually learn" 
would be abolished by removing an experimental animal's eyes. Obvi-
On Localizing Cognitive Processes 
1 9  
ously, therefore, the eyes are necessary for the behavior to occur. Just as 
obviously, however, few investigators would propose that the eyes 
are sufficient for the behavior to occur-that the neural processes 
accounting for "perceptual learning" are located in the eyes. Yet many 
investigators make exactly the same kind of fallacious association when 
they suggest that the absence of some behavior following surgery of a 
brain region (which might be necessary but not sufficient) is evidence 
that that region is the "locus" of that behavior. Particularly in the con­
text of much current theory, because we are dealing with such a complex, 
interactive, and nonlinear mechanism as the brain, we must, at the very 
least, consider the logical and conceptual foundations of all localization 
proposals. 
From the earliest work to the present day, however, imprecisely defined 
psychological entities or components have been associated with highly 
localized regions of the brain in ways deemed sufficient, but which, from 
the data, were only necessary at best. The history of such radical mental 
process-brain localization theories is not encouraging to modern efforts 
to localize cognitive processes in particular regions of the brain. The 
nineteenth-century protopsychobiologists Gall and Spurzheim (1 808), 
for example, suggested that extremely specific mental entities (or "facul­
ties," as they were then called) were associated with very narrowly cir­
cumscribed regions of the brain. As late as 1934, Kleist published his 
chart of the brain in which many different psychological properties were 
localized. This chart differs only slightly in concept from Gall and 
Spurzheim's localization chart even if the details are more modern. 
Where we find "hope" in Gall and Spurzheim's map, we find "singing" 
in Kleist's. Neither the mental faculties nor the brain locations postulated 
by these charts are any longer accepted. 
Even today, once one moves very far from the well-documented sen­
sory and motor regions, it is difficult to find unassailable, rock-solid data 
associating cognitive functions with regions of the brain that were either 
permanently or temporarily lesioned. (The full story of many of these 
historical misassociations is told in chapter 3.) 
Although we are long past accepting bizarre brain charts of mental fac­
ulties such as those proposed by Gall and Spurzheim and by Kleist, the 
premise of isolatable psychological processes still is part and parcel of 

20 
Chapter 1 
contemporary psychological science. The general idea has been reborn in 
the form of a modern "faculty"-brain localization hypothesis. How 
deeply embedded this idea is in modern psychobiology is the topic of sec­
tion 1.4. 
1 .4 
On the Ubiquity of the Localization Idea in Psychobiology 
The idea that psychological functions are localized in particular regions 
of the brain has a long history and broad-based currency. Some of the 
brain-mind process associations I now list are considered to be well es­
tablished by contemporary psychobiologists. Others, driven by the avail­
ability of new techniques to peer into the structure and action of even 
the human brain, are quite novel. (See also page 133 for a more extensive 
tabulation of similar studies based on the modern imaging techniques.) 
What factors are driving the enormous effort to place specific, but of­
ten vaguely defined cognitive processes in highly localized regions of the 
brain? It seems to me that one prominent factor is the ill-evaluated 
neuroreductionism that dominates so much thinking in psychobiology 
these days. Although a powerful and useful means of explanation in 
many sciences, reductionism is ill suited for the complications one en­
counters when one attempts to build a bridge from the cognitive to the 
neural. 
Another factor driving the current localization effort is the propensity 
of our language to confuse aspects of an entity with the entity itself. Fur­
thermore, in the theories of at least some psychologists, there are traces 
of specious reasoning more suggestive of phrenology than psychology. 
The idea of a specific locations and specific psychological "faculties" has 
a kind of superficial validity that can be all-too-easily overextended to 
unreasonable categorizations of cognitive processes. 
As a final significant factor, the successful application of localization 
research to neurology and neurosurgery in isolating local structures and 
lesions of the brain may have been uncritically carried forward to much 
of the theoretical enterprise of today's psychology. 
Whatever the factors involved, the following selective list of classic and 
modern localization theories and ideas illustrates the widespread adop­
tion of a localization point of view: 
On Localizing Cognitive Processes 
21 
1 .  Many parts of the brain have been shown to have some visual role, an 
association that may have been stimulated by recording, ablation, and 
some of the newer imaging techniques. 
a. Dresp and Bonet ( 1 995) and Von der Heydt and Peterhans ( 1 989) 
have suggested that the V2 is the locus of the illusory contour phenome­
non. 
b. Savoy and Gabrielli (1 991 ) and Watanabe ( 1 995) have suggested that 
VI is the locus of the neural events that produce the famous McCullough 
(1965) effect. 
c. Livingstone and Hubel (1988) have mapped out fine divisions of the 
primary visual cortex (VI ) in which individual neurons in different 
places encode or represent attributes of a scene such as its color, form, 
brightness, motion, and depth. 
d. Smith, Greenlee, Singh, Kraemer, and Hennig (1998), in addressing 
motion perception and its localization in he visual regions of the brain, 
distinguished between "first-order motion," which is defined by 
spatiotemporal changes in luminance, and "second-order motion," 
which is defined by more subtle dynamic measures of the stimulus. They 
found that the conventionally defined cortical areas respond with differ­
ent degrees of sensitivity to the different types of motion. 
e. Mishkin (1966) originally showed that deficits in the inferotemporal 
cortex inhibited visual object perception, now a well-accepted part of 
contemporary localization theory. (For a complete review of this topic, 
see Plaut & Farah, 1990).} 
f. Face perception has been linked with the fusiform cortex by Ojemonn, 
Ojemonn, and Lettich ( 1992) and with the inferotemporal sulcus by 
Gross, Roche-Miranda, and Bender ( 1 972), among other areas. 
2. The brain structures associated with memory have been extensively 
studied by a number of psychobiologists. 
a. Thompson ( 1 990) has associated several nuclei of the cerebellum (the 
dendate and the interpositi) with the classical conditioning of the rabbit's 
eyelid. 
b. Scoville and Milner ( 1 957) and Iwai and Mishkin ( 1990) have sug­
gested that a series of interacting brain regions is responsible for visual 
memory. Among many other areas that seem to be involved are the pri­
mary and secondary visual cortexes, the parietal and inferotemporal cor­
texes, as well as the amygdala and both sides of the hippocampus. 
c. Short-term memory or working memory, on the other hand, has been 
associated with the prefrontal cortex by Fuster ( 1 989) as well as by 
Barch, Braver, Nystrom, Forman, Noll, and Cohen ( 1 997). 

22 
Chapter 1 
d. The hippocampus is regularly associated by Squire ( 1 992), among 
others, with the storage of long-term memories. This region and others 
nearby seem to control the storage of long-term memory, but are not 
thought to store the memories themselves. It has been known since 
Lashley's earliest work (1929) that it took very large lesions in these re­
gions to reduce scores in memory-dependent tasks. This and some more 
modern concepts (e.g., the holographic hypothesis of Pribram, Nuwer, 
& Baron, 1974) suggest that long-term memories may not be localized at 
all, but stored in a distributed fashion throughout the brain. 
e. The entire limbic system has been associated with the control and reg­
ulation of memory storage by Braak ( 1 992), among others. 
3. Although speech has often been associated with both Broca's and 
Wernicke's areas on the cortex, "language" is a shorthand expression for 
highly complex processes involving the interaction of many cognitive 
and motor functions. Because language consists of high-level memory 
functions, cognitive processing of symbolic, semantic, and syntactic rela­
tionships, and the subsequent motor aspects of the articulation itself, 
many different regions of the brain are likely to be involved. For exam­
ple, Damasio (1991) has implicated, in addition to Broca's and 
Wernicke's areas, the prefrontal motor area and certain regions just be­
low it on the surface of the brain with aphasia-speechlessness. 
4. The well-known motor regions of the brain originally discovered by 
Fritsch and Hitzig ( 1 870) have recently been more precisely subdivided. 
Merians, Clark, Poizner, Macauley, Rothi, and Heilman ( 1997), for ex­
ample, place movement programs and representations in the left parietal 
cortex. 
5. Hunger, thirst, and ingestive behavior in general have long been asso­
ciated with activity in the amygdala and in the ventromedial and lateral 
regions of the hypothalamus, although there is a good deal of contro­
versy about the role of these hypothalamic nuclei in ingestive behavior. 
6. In another classic study of the motivational effects of direct electrical 
stimulation of the brain, Olds and Milner ( 1 954) associated the septal 
area of the brain with reward, pleasure, or at least some kind of repeti­
tive behavior, although the findings of others, suggest that reward cen­
ters are scattered through widely dispersed portions of the brain. 
7. Sexuality, another powerful manifestation of deeply effective motivat­
ing forces, seems to be affected by lesions or stimulation in several parts 
of the brain. Hypersexuality is thought to be induced by a temporal lobe 
lesion. 
8. The reticular activating system has been associated with wakefulness 
since early studies by Moruzzi and Magoun ( 1 949). Specific kinds of 
sleep (e.g., rapid eye movement or REM sleep) have also been associated 
On Localizing Cognitive Processes 
23 
with specific regions of the brain such as the caudal raphe, a midline 
structure in the brain stem. 
9. A number of regions in the midline of the brain have also been associ­
ated with emotions. The well-known and widely accepted concept of the 
Papez circuit includes such brain structures as the fornix, the cingulate 
cortex, the corpus callosum, the septum, the hypothalamus, the 
amygdala, and the mammilary body. Emotional processes were attrib­
uted to interactions among this system of nuclei by Papez ( 1937) and by 
MacLean (1949). Later research suggested that rage could be elicited by 
stimulation of the anterior and medial hypothalamus or the amygdala, 
and attack behavior by stimulation of some of the cerebral nuclei. (For a 
review of this well-studied topic, see LeDoux, 1996.) 
10. Surgical or traumatic transection of the corpus callosum separates 
the two halves of the brain into two functionally separate units. The 
strange behavioral results of such a surgical or traumatic intervention 
have led Sperry ( 1968) and Gazzaniga, (1983), among others, to suggest 
that there exist major left-brain and right-brain functional differences, 
although recent work by Efron ( 1 990) suggests that this distinction is 
largely mythical. 
1 1 .  Thinking, consciousness, and other complex psychological processes 
seem to be based on widespread loci in the brain. Nevertheless, many 
cognitive neuroscientists ascribe such high-level cognitive functions to 
specific parts of the "association" or "intrinsic areas "-areas left over af­
ter the sensory and motor regions have been identified. The localization 
of these functions is currently on the frontier of localization research and 
among the most difficult-and problematic-challenges any science has 
ever faced. 
a. One of the classic stories of cognitive neuroscience is the case of 
Phineas Gage, whose prefrontal cortical lobes were damaged by a explo­
sion-driven pry bar. After the accident, Gage's personality was reported 
to have changed completely. He was no longer able to plan ahead or to 
pay prolonged attention and his behavior was described as much more 
"impulsive. "  In general, the front (or prefrontal lobes) of the brain are 
now associated by many different kinds of experiments with high-level 
thought processes, in particular such activities as planning and organiz­
ing cognitive strategies. More specialized lesions of the frontal region can 
produce selective deficits in behaviors such as delayed responses or alter­
nation tasks.8 Over the years many other "high-level" processes have 
8. It should also be appreciated that even well-designed and highly controlled 
laboratory studies do not always lead to practical palliative therapies. The ex­
tremely tenuous association of the prefrontal lobe with erratic behavior in a 

24 
Chapter 1 
been associated with the frontal lobes of the brain: problem solving, by 
Luria ( 1966); perceptual analysis, by Milner, ( 1963); executive and 
attentional processes, by Posner and Raichle ( 1994, 1997); decision 
making, by Damasio, Damasio, and Christen ( 1 996); and, indeed, even 
general intelligence, by Duncan ( 1 995). Grafman ( 1 994) reviews the 
many different conceptualizations of the frontal regions of the brain; 
Grafman, Partiot, and Hollnagel ( 1 995) have tabulated a extraordinary 
list of functions (spanning seven and a half pages of a large-format jour­
nal) attributed to the frontal areas by large numbers of investigators. 
Fuster ( 1989) reviews this literature; his conclusions are supported in 
general by Robin and Holyoak ( 1 995), who summarize the cognitive 
functions associated with frontal lobe under the rubric "the creation and 
maintenance of explicit relational representations that guide thought and 
action" (p. 987), further divided into "three primary functions: main­
taining representations of elements in working memory to process cross 
temporal relationships; learning conditional contingencies; and provid­
ing resistance to interference" (p. 996). 
b. Attention has been associated with the posterior parietal region by 
Wurtz, Goldberg, and Robinson ( 1980), although Posner and Petersen 
( 1 990) and Pardo, Pardo, laner, and Raichle ( 1 990) place "vigilance" (a 
function difficult to operationally discriminate from "sustained atten­
tion" )  in the right frontal region as well. Laberge ( 1 995) associates the 
pulvinar nucleus of the thalamus with attention. Rushworth, Nixon, 
Renowden, Wade, and Passingham ( 1 997) associate the left parietal cor­
tex with what they designate as "motor attention." As attention becomes 
more and more finely divided, however, more and more regions of the 
brain are likely to become involved. For example, visual neglect, a subtle 
behavioral property, is considered by Rafal and Robertson ( 1995) to be a 
composite of a number of different psychological deficiencies, each medi­
ated by a somewhat different neural mechanism. 
Clearly, the idea that specific and isola table mental processes or func­
tions are located in particular regions of the brain is now a fundamen­
tal assumption of modern cognitive neuroscience, born from psycho­
biology, itself the offspring of what was originally called "physiological 
psychology. " 
single experimental animal subject led some psychiatrists to one of the most dis­
graceful periods in neuroscience-the lobotomy craze of the thirties, forties, and 
fifties. For a full discussion of this pseudotherapy and the social and medical 
havoc it caused, see Valenstein, 1 980, 1986. 
On Localizing Cognitive Processes 
25 
1.5 Conclusion 
The idea of localized regions of the brain being associated with particu­
lar cognitive functions is ubiquitous in classic physiological psychology 
and modern cognitive neuroscience. From the earliest records of contem­
plation and speculation about the relationship between mind or soul, on 
the one hand, and body or brain, on the other, specific regions or parts of 
the brain have been associated in some way with what were assumed to 
be distinguishable mental processes. To make such associations appears 
to be a normal and natural extrapolation of the realization that, on a 
more macroscopic level, the different organs of the body perform differ­
ent functions. 
It has also been repeatedly demonstrated, notwithstanding a few idio­
syncratic and generally refuted theories, that the brain is not a homoge­
neous tissue depending solely on its total mass to carry out what are 
undeniably its cognitive functions. Anatomists and physiologists long 
ago identified the sensory and motor regions of the brain and appreci­
ated that there were very large areas that were neither primarily sensory 
nor primarily motor. Because of the well-defined localization of sensory 
and motor functions, the idea was quickly extrapolated to an equally 
compartmentalized concept of complex mental processes. 
For over a century, it has been assumed that the association or intrinsic 
areas of the brain are the loci of the mental, cognitive, or trans­
formational processes that mediated between the sensory input and the 
motor output. These were the regions where decisions were made, where 
percepts were instantiated, and, in short, where our mental life occurred. 
It was an easy step from the tripartite (sensory-association-motor) brain 
observations to efforts to localize actions much more ephemeral, 
and much less well anchored, than sensory inputs or motor outputs in 
these association areas. This process, as we have seen, goes on with great 
enthusiasm today. 
It is the thesis of this book that although the brain is certainly differen­
tiated, most high-level cognitive functions cannot be justifiably associ­
ated wltI1O'Calized brain regions. This thesT; is based, first, on the 
empirical evidence that high-level cognitive processes are associated with 
widely distributed activity in many parts of the brain; second, and 

26 
Chapter 1 
perhaps even more compellingly, on doubts raised about our definitions 
of the co nitive processes themselve';. Our lexicon of psychological pro­
cesses fails us for thre;Principal reasons: 
1. Most psychological constructs are extremely difficult to define. In­
deed, almost all the definitions in our psychological lexicon are circular, 
invoking one mentalist term to denote the meaning of another. 
2. Many psychological constructs do not represent real psychobiological 
entities, but rather are mainly manifestations of our experimental meth­
ods and theories. Although it may be necessary to define mental pro­
cesses operationally, there is no certainty . that such operational 
definitions correlate exactly with what are, from the point of view of 
other criteria, real psychobiological processes, mechanisms, and events. 
3. Mental action and processes are generally inaccessible and can there­
fore only be inferred. These inferences may not reflect processes actually 
going on in the brain, but may instead depend on researchers' ad hoc the­
ories or predilections. Many mental activities, processes, or mechanisms 
presented as being very specifically defined are, in fact, what 
MacCorquodale and Meehl ( 1 948) designated as "hypothetical con­
structs." Because behavior is presumed by at least a few of us to be neu­
tral with regard to the actual underlying neural or cognitive mechanisms, 
we may be attempting to link these mythical, ad hoc, invented, inferred, 
or hypothetical constructs with specific brain regions that, at best, 
influence but do not uniquely instantiate or represent them. 
In addition, there are some technical difficulties that call into question 
the validity of many theories of brain localization offered in recent years. 
Some of these matters are unique to the new procedures; others, how­
ever, have been with us since the first traumatic incidents and surgical or 
experimental lesion experiments were carried out over a century ago. 
Whether new or old, these difficulties should raise conceptual flags about 
the manner in which psychological properties are attached to particular 
brain regions. 
Finally, we must ask a rather disturbing question. Suppose we could 
overcome all of the technical and conceptual issues involved in the quest 
for localization. Furthermore, suppose that it turned out that our brains 
were actually organized such that each psychological process was local­
ized in a particular part of the brain. What exactly would that tell us 
about how our brain-minds actually accomplish their functions? Would 
it answer any of the questions posed in appendix A? As pervasive and 
On Localizing Cognitive Processes 
27 
popular as the localization quest has been and currently is, it seems that 
the proper level of equivalence between the components of brain and 
mind are to be found at another, more microscopic level, one so complex 
and interactive that it carries its own baggage of barriers, problems, and 
obstacles. 
Because of these identified difficulties and other logical, technical, and 
methodological considerations, it is timely and appropriate to examine 
the entire localization issue. To do so, it is first necessary to understand 
the techniques used to determine the activity of specific regions of the 
brain. That is the goal of chapter 2. 

2 
The Technologies 
Psychologists since the origins of the science in the nineteenth century 
have longed for methods to directly study the organ of mind-the brain. 
Some of the earliest researchers took advantage of cranial injuries; later 
researchers turned to controlled lesion or stimulation experiments, either 
on laboratory animals or, somewhat less frequently and in a much less 
controlled manner, on patients during surgical procedures intended to 
serve some other therapeutic function. For many reasons, research of this 
kind on both animals and humans seems to have declined in the last de­
cade or two. The heroic earlier work of great neurosurgeons such as 
Wilder Penfield, Theodore Rasmussen, Lamar Roberts, and Herbert 
Jasper at the Montreal Neurological Institute (as reported in Penfield, 
1958; Penfield & Jasper, 1954; Penfield & Rasmussen, 1950; and 
Penfield & Roberts, 1959), long the gold standard of knowledge in this 
domain, has been supplanted by newer ways of carrying out research on 
the kinds of problems they studied. Although others had used electricity 
to stimulate neural tissue, after Caton's discovery (1875, 1 877) of the 
electrical activity of the brain the advent of electrical, electromagnetic, 
and then modern electronic devices in the twentieth century sparked an 
enormous surge of interest in the neurosciences. 
This chapter will review methods, both traditional and recent, used to 
explore brain anatomy and function, with emphasis on those germane to 
evaluating the localization hypothesis. Some of the newer methods allow 
us to study the structure and function of the brain at a level of detail and 
precision that could hardly have been imagined only a few years ago. 
To place the subsequent discussion in the proper spatial context, it 
is useful to briefly review the gross anatomy of the brain. Research 

30 
Chapter 2 
methods used by brain scientists will then be presented in roughly chro­
nological order. 
2.1 
The Brain and Brain Stem 
To understand the localization issue, we must have at least a working 
knowledge of the anatomical organization of the various parts of the 
brain. The following paragraphs present what I believe to be the mini­
mum needed to understand the structure of the brain and brain stem , 
those parts of the central nervous system relevant to the topic of localiza­
tion. Few serious scholars place cognitive functions in the peripheral 
nerves or the spinal cord, for example, although some have attributed 
some perceptual functions to the sensory nerves, usually a matter of con­
fusing the transmission properties of those input channels with localized 
representation of cognitive functions. (For a more complete discussion of 
brain anatomy, see Uttal, 1978); Carpenter & Sutin, 1983; Romero­
Sierra, 1986; Fitzgerald, 1985; or any number of other modern neuro­
anatomy texts.) 
Figure 2.1 presents a left lateral view of the major parts of the intact 
human brain, displaying the cerebellum, the lower brain stem, and the 
left hemisphere of the great cerebral mantle. This pinnacle of neuroana­
tomical evolution is covered with an intricate system of clefts and convo­
lutions. Although a few major sulci (fissures or infoldings) and gyri 
(outward protruding portions or outfoldings between the sulci) are al­
most always found in the same configuration on human brains, the de­
tails of the minor sulci and gyri on the surface of the brain are thought to 
be more or less random in detail (Richman, Stewart, Hutchinson, & 
Caviness, 1975). When similar views of a variety of human brains are 
compared, most of the smaller divisions vary considerably from one 
specimen to another. 
The two major landmarks common to all but a few of the most dis­
torted human brains are the lateral sulcus, the dividing fissure between 
the temporal and frontal regions, and the central or Sylvian sulcus, a 
groove between the precentral and postcentral gyri-the anterior and 
posterior portions of the brain, respectively. 
The visible portion of cerebral hemisphere is usually divided into sev­
eral major regions or lobes, chiefly the occipital, parietal, frontal, and 
Figure 2.1 
Precentral su Icus 
Superior frontal 
Central sulcus 
Lateral su lcus 
The Technologies 
31 
Superior temporal sulcus 
Lateral or sagittal view of the human cerebral cortex showing the major fissures 
and sulci. From Robinson and Uttal, 1 983. 
temporal lobes (see figure 2.1). Although sometimes demarcated on the 
basis of the two prominent and invariant sulci just mentioned, the spe­
cific boundaries of the cerebral lobes may also be determined on the basis 
of their physiological functions or of their cytoarchitectonics-the mi­
croscopic anatomy and arrangement of their neurons. Indeed, when 
defined by the anatomy of the neurons present, the boundary between 
separate regions of the brain becomes very sharp and distinct. 
Often, however, there is no obvious dividing line between the regions 
defined solely by their cellular anatomy. Most cortical regions defined by 
alternative criteria or by the macro anatomy of the brain can be located 
only in general terms. Of these alternative criteria, functional (physiolog­
ical) measures are by far the method of choice for determining the extent 
and function of particular brain regions. 
It is important to keep in mind that there are indisputable regional dif­
ferences in both the macroanatomy and the microanatomy of the brain, 
which is not, from the point of view of any technique, homogeneous: 

32 
Chapter 2 
different reglOns have distinctly different properties. Most notable 
among these are the primary sensory and motor regions to which the 
sense organs project. Any criticism of the functional localization of cog­
nitive functions must acknowledge this important structural fact. 
Figure 2.2 shows the standard planes of dissection commonly referred 
to in neuroanatomy. The most widely accepted system of defining loca­
tions on the surface of the brain, however, was devised almost a century 
ago by Brodmann ( 1 909), whose map of the so-called Brodmann re­
gions, was based purely on a cytoarchitectonic examination of the mor­
phology and appearance of the neurons and their patterns of 
interconnection at various locations on the cerebral mantle (figure 2.3). 
The cerebral cortex sits atop the brain stem, an enlarged region of the 
upper end of the spinal cord. The brain stem consists of the medulla (tra­
ditionally known as the "medulla oblongata"), the pons (referred to 
generically as the "midbrain"), and the diencephalon. Emerging as an 
Coronal Plane 
Horizontal Plane 
Figure 2.2 
Standard planes of inspection available with tomographic methods. Drawing by 
Mary Zhu. 
The Technologies 
33 
4 
10 
Figure 2.3 
Classic and still used Brodmann classification system of brain regions based on 
the anatomy of the neurons (cytoarchitectonics) in each region. From Brodmann, 
1909. 
outgrowth from the medulla is the cerebellum, an extraordinarily intri­
cate structure consisting of a huge number of very small neurons (per­
haps a thousand times as many as in the rest of the brain). Although 
classically associated with the fine control and coordination of bodily 
movements, the cerebellum is considered by some neuroscientists (e.g., 
Thompson, 1990) also to be the repository for some (in particular, classi­
cal conditioning) types of motor memory. Other neuroscientists are now 
beginning to assign cognitive functions to the cerebellum previously as­
signed by virtually all physiological psychologists to some part of the ce­
rebral cortex (for a recent review, see Schmahmann, 1 997). 
Embryologically, the spinal cord, the brain stem, and the cerebral 
hemispheres are all anterior outgrowths and expansions of the primitive 
neural tube that develops early in the gestation period. (The more poste­
rior region becomes the spinal cord, the spinal roots, and the autonomic 
nervous system.) The human cerebral hemispheres, although quite large, 
are not unique nor do they possess the largest cortical surface areas of 

34 
Chapter 2 
any animal. The bottlenose dolphin-a relatively small cetacean-has a 
brain that is as large as or larger than the human brain and much more 
heavily convoluted; some full-size whales have even larger brains (both 
blue and sperm whales are reported to have brains whose volume ex­
ceeds 7,800 cc, as compared to 1,500 cc, the "standard" volume of the 
human brain). 
The swelling of this extraordinarily large anterior encephalized portion 
of the spinal cord-the cerebral cortex-is nevertheless a progressive fea­
ture as one ascends the vertebrate phylogenetic tree. Sheer size, it should 
be also noted, is not perfectly correlated with "intelligence," whatever 
this complex word may mean. For example, much of the cetacean's huge 
brain is dedicated to auditory information processing. On the other 
hand, a much larger portion of the human brain appears to be associated 
with high-level cognitive information processing. Of course, we humans 
are also distinguished by our culture, writing, and speech-properties 
that define our particular kind of intelligence; other animals have other 
kinds of "intelligence" we do not regard as highly. It is therefore some­
times difficult to make unbiased interspecies comparisons. 
Our view of the brain (and our subsequent understanding of its struc­
ture) is not limited to just the surface of this remarkable organ. As dis­
cussed in chapter 1, classic Greek anatomists and Renaissance polymaths 
such as Leonard da Vinci were long ago able to dissect and understand 
the relations among some of the important internal structures of the 
brain. With the discovery of X rays by Roentgen in 1 895, the ability to 
noninvasively observe the brain made a huge leap to a new level. To be 
sure, the usual X rays offered only a dim shadowgraph of the brain's 
structure, but even this clouded view was almost a miraculous develop­
ment at that time. The development of fluoroscopy and injectable 
radiopaque dyes as adjuncts to X rays made it possible to observe active 
blood flow in the living brain-to form an image called a "cerebral 
angiogram"; in some cases, air could be injected into the cerebral ventri­
cles to make these normally fluid-filled cavities visible-to form an image 
called a "pneumoencephalogram." 
The shadowgraphs produced by X rays, even when they are moving, 
real-time images, are essentially two-dimensional images. They are pro­
duced by a beam of electromagnetic radiation passing through material 
differentially translucent to radiation of that particular wavelength. 
The Technologies 
35 
X rays pass easily through tissues opaque to radiations of longer wave­
lengths, such as visible light. There is no way to uniquely determine from 
a single X-ray image the three-dimensional shape of the brain structure 
under study. Traditional X-ray technologies rarely, if ever, used stereo­
graphic or multi-image techniques to produce three-dimensional recon­
structions of the brain. It was not until the development of modern 
tomographic techniques (described in detail later in this chapter) that 
three-dimensional reconstructive imaging burst on the scene, with its 
many opportunities for delving further into the anatomical structure of 
normal and pathological brains. 
Traditional postmortem techniques also, of course, help build a pre­
liminary understanding of the three-dimensional organization of the 
brain. Many organizational features not discernable in a conventional X­
ray image become clear when an anatomist takes the brain apart. A 
cross-sectional slice through an excised brain along virtually any axis 
shows that the brain consists of two different kinds of tissue. The inner 
"white" matter is made up mainly of long, sheathed axons, which trans­
mit information from one part of the nervous system to another. The 
"whiteness" comes from the composition of the myelin sheath-the lipid 
covering that insulates and accelerates the flow of information along ax­
ons for what may be yard-long distances in the human body. By contrast, 
the "gray" matter in the outer rind consists of cell bodies as well as short 
axons and dendrites that are not covered with myelin. Gray matter is or­
ganized into nuclei or centers that are mainly responsible for the intricate 
interaction of neural information arriving from many different sources. 
It is the complex neural computation and integration within the centers 
of the brain that account for the wonders of human behavioral and cog­
nitive adaptability and complexity. In these gray regions, signals from an 
enormous number of cells interact to control our bodies and our behav­
ior, as well as to produce all of the brain processes that come, in some 
unknown manner, to be the equivalent of the mysterious entity we refer 
to as "mental activity." However critical one may be of specific versions 
of the localization hypothesis for cognitive functions, that all mental ac­
tivity occurs as a result of brain activity cannot be denied. 
There are many nuclei and centers in the brain that can be distin­
guished by a variety of methods. Among the most useful has been the 
old-fashioned, but still widely used technique of staining neural tissue 

36 
Chapter 2 
with various inorganic and organic dyes that selectively affect different 
kinds of tissues (or are affected by different kinds of interventions). The 
largest "nucleus" of all, of course, is the cerebral cortex itself. Figure 2.4, 
a cross section of the brain, gives an idea of the large number of nuclei 
and centers that can be visualized with general purpose stains at a more 
detailed level. Other techniques such as electrical recording and 
cytoarchitectonic methods have also been used to distinguish different 
structural and functional regions of the cerebrum and the brain stem. 
Notwithstanding the progress made in understanding brain structure 
in previous centuries, the breakthrough most relevant to the localization 
of psychological functions is the development of tomographic imaging 
techniques in the past few years. These remarkable techniques and the 
machines and mathematics that make them possible are capable of pro­
ducing extraordinary images and maps of the brain's structure; we can 
now determine the location and even the time course of processes that 
occur during brain activity. Some of the new techniques described in this 
chapter allow neuroscientists to see structures and activity deep within 
the cerebral cortex or the brain stem in a way that instantiates the wildest 
hopes and dreams of previous generations of psychologists and neuro­
anatomists alike. 
As a result of a variety of techniques, some well established and some 
remarkably novel, many of the brain regions, originally defined in terms 
of their anatomy, are now considered to have highly specialized cognitive 
functions. In chapter 1, I surveyed a sample of the associations now 
claimed between mental and brain processes. A particularly popular idea 
discussed there is that specific cognitive functions are controlled by or 
equivalent to activity in narrowly circumscribed regions, possibly by one 
or a few of the many centers and nuclei that have been identified in the 
brain by other methods. 
The prototypical localization experiment attempts to show concomi­
tant activity in one of these brain regions as a mental or behavioral pro­
cess takes place. This approach is based on a number of assumptions, 
some conceptual and some technical, all of which must be critically eval­
uated if we are to understand both the true accomplishments and the 
possible failures of the entire localization enterprise. Only by examining 
the technical methods used to measure and compare brain activity and 
Figure 2.4 
The Technologies 
3 7  
iJII!!I!.,j ... [Porielol operculum 
Temporal operculum 
-Superio< lemperol 
fissure 
Claustrum 
Cross section of the human brain, showing the relationship of the cortical mantle 
and some of the most important subcortical nuclei. From Crosby, Humphrey, 
and Lauer, 1 962. 
structure can we shed light on the potential problems encountered when 
these methods are used to localize cognitive functions. 
2.2 
Anatomical, Stimulating, Recording, and Imaging Techniques 
As noted in chapter 1, the complex, but exceedingly important, scientific 
problem of localizing psychological functions in the brain has two com­
ponents. The first component is the definition and construction of 
sufficiently well defined mental entities for which a locus can be sought. 

38 
Chapter 2 
(Chapter 3 presents the arguments that this is the more difficult part of 
the localizing enterprise.) 
The second component is, at first glance, much more straightforward. 
It is the measurement of the particular parts of the brain region that have 
some definable, localizable, physiological, structural, and functional at­
tributes that allow them to be compared with the psychological functions 
they are supposed to control, represent, produce, or even "be." 
The initial problem faced by any researcher with such a goal, of 
course, is that the brain is enclosed within the skull. The first attempts to 
invade the skull for therapeutic (rather than religious or sacrificial) rea­
sons occurred surprisingly long ago. There is abundant evidence that 
therapeutic trephination was used by the Cro-Magnons of the upper 
Paleolithic period (perhaps as long as 40,000 years ago). Further, many 
other, more recent preliterate cultures in South America, Africa, and 
Oceania have independently developed this drastic surgical procedure. 
(For an account of prehistoric neurosurgical procedures, see Mettler and 
Mettler, 1947-an elegant, and now classic, history of medicine.) 
Notwithstanding ample evidence that some patients recovered from 
their trephinations, the reasons for not invading the skull to observe the 
brain are both several and persistent. One major reason is that it is sim­
ply too dangeroqs. Patients with skull injuries, whether accidentally or 
intentionally imposed, have a very bad habit of dying or being noticeably 
incapacitated. Among all of the surgical techniques developed until the 
middle of the twentieth century, manipulating the brain was the one that 
produced some of the most terrible consequences, even if the patient 
survived. 
Closely related to the general dangers of accessing the brain are more 
specific ones: it is not always evident what damage is being done during 
brain surgery until after the procedure is over. The brain itself does not 
produce pain when injured. Therefore, a surgeon has to be excruciat­
ingly careful not to do damage regions that might produce some subse­
quent sensory, motor, or cognitive deficit after the patient has been sewn 
up. Cutting the wrong area could blind, mute, paralyze, or affect the es­
sential cognitive processes of a patient in complex and what remain mys­
terious ways. 
The Technologies 
39 
Another major reason not to invasively explore brain structure and 
function as a scientific enterprise has been the special status given to the 
human body, particularly by organized religions throughout the last mil­
lennium. Chapter 1 discussed how long it took for anatomy in general, 
and neuroanatomy in particular, to become acceptable medical practice. 
The Roman Catholic Church, among others, discouraged the dissection 
of corpses during the Middle Ages and the early Renaissance. Indeed, au­
topsies are still frowned on by some contemporary religious sects, and 
many others in our society have secular objections to the procedure. Ex­
perimentation on living humans has had even less acceptability, for com­
pellingly powerful ethical and social reasons, particularly in the last half 
of the twentieth century. The twentieth century witnessed a healthy 
growth in society's unwillingness to permit human experimentation ex­
cept under the most stringent of conditions. Full, informed consent on 
the part of patient or subject, community approval and oversight, and, 
perhaps most important of all, a totally justified and redeeming reason 
are all routinely required before even behavioral studies on humans can 
be carried out in hospitals and universities. 
New procedures to study both the structure and the function of the 
brain, without invading its bony vault, have therefore been continuously 
sought for both therapeutic and scientific reasons. Today, there are many 
noninvasive ways to study the brain and its functions, not the least of 
which is the observation and analysis of motor and verbal behavior-the 
tools used by psychologists. Although there are many questions about 
the accessibility of mental processes (Uttal, 2000a), there is no question 
that we can answer at least some of the knotty problems about human 
brain function by using appropriately constructed psychophysical and 
psychometric techniques to observe behavior. Although there are many 
barriers that prevent us from solving all brain-mind problems, there cer­
tainly are some that can be resolved by behavioral methods. For exam­
ple, the sensitivity thresholds of the visual and auditory receptors are 
well understood; accurate inferences can be drawn about their functional 
nature purely on the basis of psychophysical studies. In this chapter, 
however, we are mainly concerned with techniques that allow us to study 
the anatomical structure and physiological functions of the associative 

40 
Chapter 2 
areas of the brain. It is to a discussion of these techniques that we now 
turn. 
2.2.1 
Electrical and Chemical Stimulation 
In some cases, researchers can determine the function of a particular re­
gion of the brain by directly manipulating it and observing the produced 
behavioral effects. This was one of the earliest methods used to define 
what came to be called the "motor regions" of the cerebral cortex. Sev­
eral different methods can be used to produce brain activity including the 
deposition of an activating chemical directly on the exposed cortical sur­
face. However, given the electrochemical nature of the nervous system, 
one of the most straightforward, easily controlled and measured ways to 
determine which regions mediate which muscular activities is to use elec­
trical stimulation. 
By no means a new idea, electrical stimulation of nervous tissue was 
carried out as early as 1660 by Jan Swammerdam ( 1637-1 680), who un­
knowingly used electricity, produced by a bimetallic contact, to stimulate 
the muscles of a frog's heart. Swamrnerdam hung the heart between a sil­
ver wire and a brass contact-an excellent source of the very small elec­
trical voltages necessary to stimulate motor units. 
In 1791, Luigi Galvani ( 1737-1798) carried out a much more com­
plete set of experiments in which he stimulated a frog's leg muscle with 
what he knew to be electricity. He observed that when electrical signals, 
generated by lightning rods, by dissimilar metals, or even by another frog 
were applied to the frogs muscle, it twitched. It is Galvani to whom 
credit is historically given for identifying the electrical sensitivity of the 
nervous system.1 
In the latter half of the nineteenth century, both electric batteries (vol­
taic piles) and electromagnetic induction coils were being used by physi­
ologists such as Claude Bernard, in 1 858, to study neuroelectric 
phenomena and Fritsch and Hitzig (1 870) in their pioneering study of 
the motor cortex. The real breakthrough came in the twentieth century 
with the sequential development of vacuum tubes and solid-state elec-
1 .  The previously known sensitivity of the brain to electrical stimulation should 
not be confused with Caton's subsequent discovery that the brain produced its 
own recordable electrical signals. 
The Technologies 
41 
tronics. Devices then became available to produce precisely defined and 
controlled amounts of electrical stimuli. Researchers could not only de­
termine the shape of the applied stimulus voltage but, even more impor­
tant, they could maintain constant currents, unaffected by the varying 
impedance loads created by the neural tissue, over the duration of the 
stimulus. 
Electrical stimulation, among its other advantages, is convenient and 
easy to use. Although initially used to determine the limits of the motor 
regions of the brain, with the development of surgical techniques (by 
neurosurgical pioneers such as Penfield) in which the patient could be 
kept awake during an operation, electrical stimulation could be used to 
define the limits of sensory regions by simply asking subjects what they 
felt, heard, or saw when the current was applied. It could also be used 
to define the critical and necessary regions for speech by observing 
the interference effects of locally applied electrical stimulation on 
articula tion. 
Beyond the classic input and output regions, however, the use of elec­
trical stimulation to chart the brain becomes more problematical. Studies 
of regions involved with central or cognitive processing depend on intro­
spective reports by patients or subjects who, in the surgical situation, are 
not always capable of producing clear-cut answers to what they "think 
they are thinking." Even under normal conditions, such introspective re­
ports are fallible and problematic. 
Electrical stimulation has another major technical problem associated 
with it. The extent to which current is leaking or short-circuiting to re­
gions other than the one directly stimulated is not always clear. Thus 
there is always some doubt whether the "localized region" being acti­
vated is actually limited to where the electrodes are placed. Indeed, to ap­
ply any electrical stimulus requires two electrodes-an anode and a 
cathode-and the path of the current between them is, for all practical 
purposes, indeterminate in the wet, heterogeneously packed tissue of the 
central nervous system. Other procedures have therefore been sought 
that more definitively delimit the region being stimulated. 
One such procedure used over the years is the application of chemicals. 
Substances such as strychnine can activate well-defined regions of 
cortical tissue by virtue of the specific sensitivity of neurons to these 

42 
Chapter 2 
substances. Activity generated in this way can be traced to other portions 
of the brain or the effects observed as overt behavior. 
Chemicals applied systemically to the nervous system provide another 
means of exploring some aspects of brain localization. A particular sub­
stance-for example, a hypothesized transmitter-may accumulate in a 
particular part of the brain and leave signs of the location of this region 
later when the tissue is examined in postmortein studies. Similarly, be­
cause many radioactive tracer substances are metabolized only in re­
stricted regions of the brain, they (or their breakdown products) may 
accumulate in a particular region and leave a trace that can be seen on 
autoradiograms of the sectioned postmortem tissue. Other substances 
may fluoresce under the influence of ultraviolet light to signal where in 
the nervous system they have accumulated and thus where they are uti­
lized during brain activity. 
Although chemical tracers of the kind just mentioned may have very 
specific action on a certain transmitter system or even on behavior, 
whether they should be used at all is extremely controversial. We still 
have a very limited understanding of how they alter mental phenomena 
at the level of neural interactions. (For a critical assessment of the rela­
tion between drugs and mental health, see Valenstein, 1998.) 
2.2.2 
Surgical, Chemical, and Cryogenic Extirpation Techniques 
A number of approaches to localizing a region of the brain associated 
with some psychological process have been taken throughout the history 
of neuroscience. The approach discussed in the previous subsection, "se­
lective activation," involves stimulating selected intact tissues and ob­
serving the effects on behavior. In an effort to limit the region under 
study more precisely than can be done by applying electrical stimuli or 
even chemicals to selected intact tissues, neuroscientists have taken an 
opposite approach, "selective deactivation," using a variety of methods 
to remove, temporarily or permanently, selected brain regions, and again 
observing the effects on behavior. 
It is important to appreciate from the outset that there are many hid­
den assumptions on which this approach is based. The main assumption 
is that the region removed or otherwise deactivated operates in func­
tional independence from other regions that might be involved in the 
The Technologies 
43 
psychological process under study. It should be pointed out that this as­
sumption and others considered in chapter 3 are most likely unjustified. 
The brain centers and nuclei do not, even to a first approximation, oper­
ate in such splendid isolation. Rather there is an enormous amount of in­
teraction, both in an excitatory and inhibitory fashion. Thus it is always 
uncertain what the observed effect of removing or otherwise deactivating 
a particular brain region really means. Did it release some other region 
from inhibition? Was it the actual locus of the phenomenon under study? 
Did it perform some necessary antecedent process without which the 
phenomenon could not take place? Was it merely a remote controller or 
was it the actual site of the mechanisms subserving the observed phe­
nomenon? Many of these questions are not well answered by any of the 
lesioning techniques because of the high degree of interconnection be­
tween so many different regions of the brain. 
Indeed, the growing evidence that brain regions are not functionally 
independent may explain why the deactivation approach has fallen out 
of favor in recent years. It also should raise concern about some of 
the new technologies that are being currently substituted for the older 
methods. 
The most common selective deactivation techniques in the mid-twenti­
eth century have actually disconnected or removed particular regions 
from the rest of the brain, whether by surgery, chemicals, or cryogenics. 
The classic selective deactivation technique has been the surgical 
lesioning (extirpation, ablation, or removal) of the cortical area of inter­
est. This procedure produces a permanent and, under ideal circum­
stances, a relatively well defined lesion of the cerebrum or brain stem. 
The reasons for selecting a particular area for surgical removal to test 
some specific version of the localization hypothesis vary. Previous evi­
dence from a fortuitous accident may have suggested a relation between 
the area to be studied and some behavioral or cognitive process. The ex­
perimenter may simply have had an inspiration that this might be an in­
teresting place to work. Perhaps this inspiration was stimulated by 
analogy to some other animal model or by a report of some accidental 
human neuropsychological phenomenon. Very often there was some pre­
liminary evidence, sometimes obtained with another technique such as a 
microelectrode or electroencephalographic recording that suggested 

44 
Chapter 2 
activity correlated with the psychological phenomenon might be found 
in a particular place. Finally, some exploratory surgery may have been 
undertaken simply to see what would happen if this or that area was 
deactivated. 
With the exception of a few therapeutic surgical procedures on hu­
mans, carried out for other than research purposes, surgical extirpation 
has been applied almost exclusively to experimental animals such as rats, 
cats, and monkeys. Although cats and rats are convenient, cost little, and 
are easy to maintain, monkeys are preferred because of their closer 
phylogenetic similarity to humans. 
The protocol for a lesion experiment is deceptively straightforward. 
Following the surgery and a suitable recovery time, the experimental ani­
mals are tested on some standardized behavioral test. Their test results 
are then compared with those of a control group-or, better, with those 
of animals subjected to a sham operation-to determine the effect of the 
lesion.2 Learning and memory, maze running, detour behavior, emo­
tional behavior, decision making, and visual and tactile discriminations 
have been among the many things tested to determine the effects of re­
movmg a given area. 
Like electrical stimulation, however, surgical extirpation is subject to 
technical difficulties. The boundaries defined by a surgical procedure are 
not always quite as clearly demarcated as the experimenter would like. 
Even with the best procedures, the surgical lesion does not define sharply 
demarcated regions with precise anatomical boundaries, much less func­
tional ones. When one is dealing with a system of such overlapping func­
tional regions as the human brain, the sharpness of one's scalpel does 
not guarantee the precision of the extirpation. Furthermore, concomitant 
damage to fibers of passage routed beneath the removed cortical 
areas sometimes produces unrelated effects at distant and unexpected 
locations. 
2. In a sham operation, all surgical procedures are carried out except the proce­
dure defining the experiment. For example, if the goal was to test the effect of re­
moving a particular area of the brain, in the sham operation control, the animal 
would be anesthetized, its skull opened, and the pia and dura matter cut, but the 
area of concern would not be removed. Because of the unpredictable effects of 
secondary factors such as anesthesia, sham operations are the best kind of con­
trol for experiments of this sort. 
The Technologies 
45 
Most fundamentally, as noted earlier, the brain system's complexity is 
always greater than any version of the localization hypothesis suggests. A 
particular psychological or behavioral function almost certainly involves 
more than a single area. The area under study may inhibit or even 
disinhibit some other area (i.e., release it to perform a function it could 
not carry out prior to the operation). Interaction, rather than isolation, is 
probably far more typical of brain organization than the simplest version 
of the localization hypothesis suggests. Yet it is on the assumption that 
regions are modular and functionally independent that such a version 
and the interpretation of experiments used to test it are usually based. 
Furthermore, the trauma of brain surgery is great. The need to allow 
an experimental animal sufficient time to recover from its surgery may 
also inadvertently allow it to recover the lost function by transferring it 
to some other brain locus-the ubiquitous "recovery of function" arti­
fact that so confused some of the early pioneers in this research field. 
For these reasons, and for other more mundane and practical ones (the 
rise of the animal rights movement, the availability of new noninvasive 
techniques, and the increasing expense involved in experimental brain 
surgery-particularly with respect to the animals most useful to the sci­
ence, monkeys and apes) there is much less this type of research than in 
the earlier decades of the twentieth century. 
Alternative methods have been developed that overcome at least some 
of the limits of lesion-creating surgery. Chemicals now exist that can 
functionally deactivate regions of the brain, either temporarily or perma­
nently. Substances such as kainic acid, for example, can irreversibly ter­
minate neural activity in a relatively restricted area by overstimulating 
the glutamate postsynaptic receptors. The topical application of 
haloperidol, on the other hand, produces a functional lesion that can ac­
tually be reversed after a period of time. It works by temporarily block­
ing dopamine receptors in the postsynaptic regions. After a time, it can 
be washed off and the normal function returns. Application of lidocaine 
locally and temporarily stops the electrical activity of neurons by block­
ing sodium ion channels. 
Similarly, cryogenic blockade of neural function has been used with the 
expectation that after defrosting, the function of the treated region can 
return. This would provide an important self-control that would allow 
the behavior of the experimental animal, before, during, and after the 

46 
Chapter 2 
experimental deactivation to be compared. Given the vagaries of individ­
ual differences, there could be no better anchor than using a subject as its 
own control. 
2.2.3 
Direct Electrical Recording of Cortical Responses 
The stimulation techniques work especially well for determining the lo­
cation of regions that are primarily motor: blocking or eliciting motor 
behavior can be directly observed. If, however, one is interested in study­
ing the sensory areas or other cognitive processes, the reverse problem is 
encountered-although it is relatively easy to stimulate the system with 
natural stimuli, it is relatively difficult to observe the resulting neural re­
sponse. Stimulation with the normal or adequate stimuli for a given sen­
sory modality (as well as electrical stimulation of afferent nerves) 
produces subtle and complex patterns of electrical activity in the corre­
sponding receiving or sensory areas of the brain. Determining the brain 
locations into and onto which these afferent signals project has been one 
of the most important and active areas of neuroscience research for 
about a half century. 
In the earliest experiments on brain electrical responses carried out by 
Caton, primitive recording devices (e.g., string galvanometers) were used 
to measure induced brain activity. These devices were slow and insensi­
tive; they deformed and distorted the time course of the signals elicited in 
the brain because of their own low impedances and prolonged time con­
stants. The key to answering sensory localization questions lay in the 
technological development of modern high-impedance, high-gain, high­
speed electronic amplifiers. Connected to appropriate contacts or elec­
trodes, such amplifiers could produce a deflection of an oscilloscope 
trace or a sound on a loudspeaker each time a specific neural center or 
even a single neuron had been activated by a particular stimulus. 
High-input impedance is an essential aspect of amplifiers in devices 
used to record brain signals. If the input impedance of the recording de­
vice is too low, then part of the signal is shunted (i.e., short-circuited) 
through the recording device, and the true form of the response dis­
torted. If the input impedance is high, however, the electrode and 
amplifier have essentially no effect on the bioelectrical processes of the 
neural tissue, and the biologically generated signal itself is much less 
strongly affected. 
The Technologies 
47 
Direct electrical recording can take place in two distinctly different 
ways, each of which is specialized for particular purposes. Macro­
electrodes (relatively large electrodes) can be used to pick up the accu­
mulated activity of a huge numbers of neurons-recordings that 
are variously called "compound" or "pooled responses." Macro­
electrodes can be constructed from virtually anything that provides good 
electrical contact. Some of the original macroelectrodes were simply 
tufts of cotton soaked in saline solution or even the pith from a 
birch tree; others have been made from metals. (For an elegant discus­
sion of early studies of the electrical activity of the brain, see Brazier, 
1 961.) 
Alternatively, micro electrodes (very small electrodes) may be used to 
record the responses from single neurons. Microelectrode technology has 
improved enormously over the last few decades. The trick is to make an 
electrode small enough in diameter to penetrate the cell membrane into a 
neuron without destroying it. The membrane of a neuron is sufficiently 
strong and elastic so that it seals itself around a small puncture wound 
and maintains the integrity of the intracellular fluids even if the electrode 
is kept in place for a prolonged period of time-sometimes as long as a 
day. 
The response recorded with a microelectrode depends on the type of 
neuron and the role that neuron plays in the complex network of the 
nervous system. Some neurons, such as the receptors and the bipolar 
cells of the retina and other short and compact information-integrating 
cells of the central nervous system, produce only local responses, which 
decline with distance and can be accumulated with other similar re­
sponses. On the other hand, cells specialized for long-distance communi­
cation by virtue of their elongated axons produce a specialized kind of 
nondecremental response, called the propagating spike action potential. 
The magnitude of this response depends only on the metabolic state of 
the neuron and does not decline as the signal is propagated to a distant 
part of the nervous system. 
Microelectrodes with micron-diameter tips have been made both from 
metal, by electrolytic polishing, and from glass, by drawing a heated 
glass tube down to an equally fine point and then breaking the drawn 
region to yield a pair of usable electrodes. The glass tube is filled with 
a conducting solution to produce a conducting point (the solution), 

48 
Chapter 2 
surrounded by an insulating sheath (the glass); the metal point (the con­
ductor) is usually lacquered with some kind of an paint (the insulator) to 
achieve the same geometry. The effect in either case is the same-to pro­
duce a fine electrically conducting core that can be inserted into a single 
neuron, while at the same time maintaining electrical isolation from 
the intercellular fluids. Either technique can produce tips smaller than 
1 micron. 
The problem of the input impedance of the high-gain amplifiers used in 
neurophysiology is of special importance when one is using micro­
electrodes. The combination of a high-impedance electrode with a low­
impedance amplifier would create a voltage divider that could 
completely hide the signal being studied. Most of the very low voltages 
produced by a neuron would be sensed across the high-impedance 
microelectrode; the amplified signals would be an inconsequential por­
tion of the actual neuronal response. 
Virtually all of these technical problems have been solved. The technol­
ogy of recording electrodes and amplifiers is now well advanced and one 
can buy items off the shelf for the most demanding studies of the func­
tion of single neurons. Compared to other biologically generated volt­
ages, the voltage recorded from within a neuron (more correctly, across 
the cell membrane of the neuron) is quite high, as high as 140 millivolts 
(mv) across the membrane of a receptor hair cell in the cochlea of the in­
ner ear, although the usual transmembrane voltage is only 65-70 mv. 
Signals at such voltages are well above the noise levels of even ordinary­
quality amplifiers. As we shall see later in this chapter, other biologically 
significant signals can be at much lower voltages-only a few microvolts 
(/-Lv). Signals of very low voltages are obviously present and physiologi­
cally effective in the synaptic and cell hillock regions of a neuron. It is 
here that local potentials can summate and collectively influence 
neuronal responses even though they are orders of magnitude smaller 
than the classic spike action potential. 
The newest development in the micro electrode field is the invention of 
multiple electrode systems that allow the activity of many cells to be re­
corded at the same time. Modern large-scale integration techniques, orig­
inally developed to facilitate the construction of computer chips, has 
been applied to meet this need. Systems with over a hundred electrodes 
have been reportedly used in acute preparations; even the more serious 
The Technologies 
49 
technical difficulties of chronic preparations can be met with as many as 
sixty-four electrodes. 
Two problems, however, remain with the multielectrode approach. 
First, an individual high-gain preamplifier is required to record signals 
from each of the tiny electrodes, which makes for a cumbersome system, 
although one that can be constructed with conventional equipment. The 
output signals from the array of preamplifiers are usually multiplexed by 
some sort of a special-purpose switching computer so that all of the in­
formation is eventually channeled along a single line. Some preliminary 
processing (e.g., tagging when each neural response occurs and the num­
ber of the electrode at which the signal was recorded) can be carried out 
by the multiplexing computer. The pooled and preprocessed information 
is then sent to a more powerful host computer in which the signal pro­
cessing and analysis is completed. 
A second and even more formidable problem with multielectrode 
arrays is how to deal with the explosion of data produced by such 
a system; an experimenter and the host computer can quickly be 
swamped by the enormous amount of information generated by a cluster 
of 64 or 100 electrodes, which indeed would overwhelm even large-scale 
computer facilities. For this reason, few host computers use all of the 
data that may be generated by a multielectrode array. Although it was 
originally hoped that such an array would provide a means for 
analyzing the sequential dependencies and interactions of many neurons, 
in reality, systems of this sort are mainly applied to the computation and 
presentation of a topographic map of the spatial distribution of neuronal 
responses. 
It should be further noted that even when the amount of data is not 
overwhelming, a complex, nonlinear system composed of only a few cells 
may produce results that cannot be analyzed. When one considers that 
chaotic and unpredictable neural interactions, for example, may be pro­
duced by as few as three neurons (Harmon, 1959), the hope that a 
multielectrode array will be able to untangle the complex interactions of 
a physiologically or psychologically significant neural network all but 
vanishes. 
Although, in some situations, measures such as a vector defined by the 
properties of the original electrodes may be used to characterize the sys­
tem, no one has been able to model the action of a neural system in all 

50 
Chapter 2 
of its complexity for even a few neurons. Thus it may be advantageous 
to take advantage of the accumulating power of macroelectrodes to di­
rectly produce compound or pooled potentials as an alternative to the 
hurculean, but ultimately ill-advised attempts to record from so many 
cells simultaneously. 
Although macroelectrode recording at or below the surface of the 
brain has, as we have seen, also been used to localize the brain regions 
associated with behavioral functions, neuroscientists have sought 
noninvasive techniques to accomplish the same thing. The first signifi­
cant such technique is our next topic. 
2.2.4 The Electroencephalogram 
Thus far, we have discussed recording signals with electrodes at or below 
the exposed surface of the brain. In the first decades of the twentieth cen­
tury, however, some extraordinary discoveries were made, originally in 
Poland and Russia, that allowed researchers to record brain signals 
through the intact skull. For almost forty years after Caton's experi­
ments, the only recording instrument available had been the primitive 
string galvanometer-a relatively slow and insensitive measuring device. 
In 1913, however, working with curarized intact dogs, Pravdich­
Neminsky reported recording tiny transcranial voltages, in what came 
to be called an "electroencephalogram" (EEG). The critical and enor­
mously influential next step was made in 1 925 by Hans Berger of the 
University of Jena, who published the results of a study (Berger, 1929) 
of signals obtained through the intact skull of a human being. Berger's 
first observations included the frequently confirmed observation that 
mental activity such as attention could inhibit these tiny EEG signals. 
He was also among the first to note that the human EEG signals, like 
those observed earlier by Pravdich-Neminsky in dogs, were spontane­
ous-that is, they were generated when no identifiable external stimuli 
were present. 
One of the most important analytic features of the EEG is its frequency 
spectrum. EEG signals vary with time and appear to be the summation of 
a number of different voltage oscillations occurring within five classically 
identified frequency bands: the very slow delta waves ( 1-4 Hz), theta 
waves (7-9 Hz), the high-energy alpha waves ( 1 0-12 Hz), the even faster 
The Technologies 
51 
beta waves (21-23 Hz), and the very fast but low-energy gamma waves 
( - 50 Hz). Combinations of these frequency components have been ten­
tatively associated with normal and pathological conditions over the 
years. 
The impact of the discovery of the EEG on neurology, psychiatry, and 
psychology was enormous. Here, it was hoped, was the magic technique 
that would allow behavioral scientists, in particular, to directly examine 
and measure the activity of the human brain and to correlate brain activ­
ity with mental functions. Alas, there are still fundamental barriers to 
understanding the human electroencephalogram. Indeed, just how lim­
ited the EEG is has not always been clear to many practitioners of this 
technique. Thus, for example, some of the earliest results from Berger's 
lab were ignored and their implicit warnings unappreciated. Specifically, 
the most energetic frequency component of the electroencephalogram­
alpha waves-seemed to be associated with "idling" activity: alpha 
waves were "blocked" or deactivated, rather than activated, when sub­
jects became mentally active. The correlation between the major fre­
quency components of the EEG and mental activity was, therefore, 
essentially negative. 
Other more imaginative applications of the EEG produce "conclu­
sions" that usually turn out to be little more than science fiction fanta­
sies. No one has yet been able to connect these supposed indicators of 
our thought processes directly to the electronic equipment for control 
purposes other than in the crudest, binary (on-off) manner. The typical 
way in which this illusion of "direct mental control" was implemented 
was to use signals such as the EEG (or even motor units in the muscles) 
that were under indirect control by higher-level neural mechanisms. Sub­
jects could learn to control these signals in ways that are still not well un­
derstood but that could provide simple inputs to electronic controls. 
Such a phenomenon, however, no more demonstrates a direct connec­
tion between a subject's "thoughts" and a computer than does using a 
keyboard or the electromyogram from some other, uninjured part of the 
body to control a prosthetic arm. 
No convincing proof exists, furthermore, that supports the idea that 
the EEG can be used as a lie detector. Even the associations between EEG 
frequencies and sleep cycles are more correlative than explanatory. No 

52 
Chapter 2 
psychologist has yet been able to demonstrate a solid association be­
tween specific thoughts and these erratically changing scalp potentials: 
because the EEG is a cumulative measure of all neuronal activity in the 
brain, the details of the interactions within the myriad of neurons in the 
network are lost. 
Indeed, there has even been some criticism suggesting that the EEG 
may not even measure neuronal activity. For example, Kennedy ( 1 959) 
suggested that the EEG is actually a product of the physical motion of a 
charged body-the mass of the brain. He proposed that the EEG is pro­
duced by mechanical actions such as the cardiac pulse that shakes the 
brain in a rhythmic manner. To prove this point, Kennedy demonstrated 
that a crock of gelatin shaped like the human head produced signals very 
much like the alpha rhythm of the EEG when electrodes are attached to 
its side and it is repeatedly tapped at a rate approximating that of the 
heart beat. 
Notwithstanding this possible electromechanical effect, however, the 
EEG has proven clinical uses. It can definitely localize a tumor or lesion, 
or demonstrate some other gross abnormality. It can also, in some situa­
tions, determine when a person is brain-dead, asleep, in one or another 
stage of anesthesia, or suffering from an epileptic attack that has no ex­
ternal signs or from any of a number of other brain disorders. What it 
has not been able to do, however, is to provide tight and reliable correla­
tions of brain functions and localizations with psychological states. Early 
work sought EEG correlates of variables such as personality, attention, 
and emotion. Little of this work seems to have had any success. Interpre­
tations of the EEG are still very much an art exercised by an "expert," 
rather than a precise quantitative exercise. The two main reasons for the 
continuing failure to find reliable EEG correlates are the diffuse nature of 
the responses and the lack of any tight linkage to definable stimuli. The 
next step in the development of techniques to measure brain activity, 
however, initially promised to overcome at least some of these problems. 
2.2.5 
The Evoked Brain Potential 
Once it was established that electrical signals could be detected through 
the intact skull, attention could be paid to overcoming some of the tech­
nical problems with free-running or spontaneous EEGs. Foremost 
The Technologies 
53 
among these problems, EEG signals could only be loosely linked to psy­
chological and behavioral measures or even to the time scale of external 
stimuli. For example, although an experimenter could easily direct a sub­
ject to "count from 100 to 1 without speaking," the time scale of such a 
behavioral sequence (and of its measured EEG) was simply too long to 
determine any fine correspondences between these endogenously gener­
ated "stimuli" and electrical brain responses. On the other side of the 
coin, one advantage that the EEG did exhibit was that the signals were 
fairly easy to record, typically, at voltages as high as 100 fLV. 
To link the electrical response of the brain to stimuli on a finer time 
scale, investigators in the early 1940s tried to stimulate the various sense 
organs with specific impulsive stimuli to evoke or generate a response 
that could be recorded using skull electrodes and EEG amplifiers. The re­
sult was total failure. These early experiments did not produce a detect­
able 
response-one 
distinguishable from the 
biological 
"noise" 
generated by the brain and the electronic interference produced by the 
electronic equipment of that era. Two possibilities existed: ( 1 )  the re­
sponse signal was not there; (2) it was there, but so small as to be unde­
tectable by virtue of low signal-to-noise ratios. The latter alternative 
eventually proved to be true. The problem was to extract these minute 
response signals-"evoked brain potentials" (EVBPs)-from the noise 
when they were only about 1 0  fLV or so in amplitude and when the com­
bined noise from the electronic equipment and the ongoing EEG might 
be ten or a hundred times higher. 
After World War II, Dawson ( 1 950, 1954) followed up on work that 
had been used to enhance the tiny return signals from transmitted radar 
pulses during the war. He suggested that a simple averaging or superim­
position technique could also be used to accomplish this feat for the very 
small EVBPs. The idea was that the brain responses linked to the stimu­
lus would be nonrandom and would therefore repeat from trial to trial, 
sequentially reinforcing themselves. On the other hand, the "random" 
noise from the amplifier and the quasi-random EEG would both some­
times be positive and sometimes negative and thus would tend to cancel 
themselves out as a function of the square root of the number of accumu­
lated signals. To extract and measure a stable EVBP. the stimulus had to 
be presented a large number of times-typically, 50 or 100 times. 

54 
Chapter 2 
Dawson's first device ( 1 950) was a bank of electronic storage capaci­
tors, which stored the charges in sequential order by moving a commuta­
tor to distribute the charge corresponding to different time epochs of the 
EVBP onto different capacitors. In this manner, a series of voltage mea­
surements accumulated that approximated the shape of the EVBP. 
Although Dawson also used photographic superimposition techniques, 
the real breakthrough came when digital computers were applied to the 
task to average, rather than simply accumulate, sequential signals. Using 
a statistical averaging procedure, highly accurate evaluations of the 
shape of an evoked potential could be made. Figure 2.5 is an example of 
an EVBP produced by an electrical stimulus to the wrist. Recordable sig­
nals can also be obtained from the visual (Beatty & Uttal, 1968), audi­
tory (Teder-Salejarvi & Hillyard, 1998), as well as from the somato­
sensory system. 
As the accurate averaging procedure became standardized and new 
types of all-electronic equipment became available, the procedure was 
offered as a hardwired program on special-purpose digital computers. 
Ultimately, the arrival of the general-purpose, personal computer de­
stroyed that special-purpose market. Currently, personal home comput­
ers using relatively simple analog-to-digital conversion input devices and 
equally simple programs are the devices of choice for processing EVBPs. 
The evoked brain potential became a popular tool for physiological 
psychology researchers in the latter half of the twentieth century. Various 
components of the EVBP have been associated with various brain re­
gions, from there, the leap was often made to specific cognitive pro­
cesses. Positive EVBP signal components, highly localized, recorded 
mainly over known visual, auditory, or somatosensory areas, and occur­
ring some 30-40 msec after a stimulus, have been interpreted as emana­
tions from the primary sensory cortices. Slower waves, recorded over the 
entire brain, were later associated with the state of wakefulness (Uttal & 
Cook, 1964). This EVBP component was thought to be emitted as a dif­
fuse result of activity from the reticular region of the brain stem. 
Another EVBP component, recorded at the very top center of the 
skull at its maximum strength, was designated the "contingent negative 
variation" (CNV) by its discovers (Grey Walter, Cooper, Aldridge, 
> 
" 
... 
Figure 2.5 
The Technologies 
55 
Evoked brain potential (EVBP) from the human somatosensory system showing 
the fast early components and the later slow wave. From Uttal and Cook, 1 964. 
McCallum, & Winter, 1964). The CNV has been associated with the re­
lationship between two sequential stimuli and can be enhanced by a con­
ditioning procedure that links the two stimuli so that one stimulus is 
contingent on the other. 
The EVBP technique continues to hold an enormous fascination for 
some psychologists. The magnitude of the effort dedicated to this 
neuroelectric indicator is nowhere better evidenced than in the massive 
volume written by Regan ( 1 989), which catalogues medical and scientific 
applications of the EVBP technique and, perhaps better than any other 
source, documents the full range of interests affected by it. Nevertheless, 
the technique has from its inception been beset by difficulties. The possi­
ble contamination of the brain signal with electromyographic activity, 
the essential nonlinearity of some of the mathematical systems (beyond 
averaging) commonly used to extract the EVBP, the spread of signals 
from one part of the brain (or part of the skull) to another, the very slight 
differences all too often presented as conclusive data with inadequate 
measures of variability, and the conceptual confusion of signs with codes 

56 
Chapter 2 
(Uttal, 1967) all contributed to the lessening of interest in this technique. 
Moreover, as cited by Regan ( 1 989, pp. 53-56), there have been the fol­
lowing technical and statistical difficulties in interpreting the EVBP: 
1 .  There is a considerable uncertainty about the latency between the 
stimulus and the triggered EVBP that can distort the signal. 
2. Signal and noise in the EVBP may not be statistically independent. 
That is, the EVBP may be linked in some ways to the EEG cycle. 
3. As a result of ( 1 )  and (2) and the vagaries of the averaging process, the 
system may sometimes show no response where a response is actually 
present. 
4. Because the brain system may not be "stationary" over the time it 
takes to stimulate and record 50 or 100 responses, what is being mea­
sured may, in fact, be the average of a number of different stages that 
may differ significantly. 
EVBPs can be used reliably in determining the timing relations be­
tween cortical activity and other stimulus or behavioral measures such as 
eye movements (Wauschkuhn et aI., 1998) or in determining the integrity 
of specific questionable sensory pathways in apparently deaf children 
(Bruneau, Roux, Guirin, Barthilimy, & Lelord, 1997). To declare EVBP 
signals the equivalents of human mental processes, however, as opposed 
to simple indicators of transmission channel integrity, is a stretch of logic 
to the breaking point. 
Be that as it may, the shift in attention away from the EVBP technique 
had little to do with conceptual or technical difficulties-most practitio­
ners in pursuit of localization results seemed to ignore such difficulties. 
Rather, it was driven by the next important development in the correla­
tive study of brain and mental activity-the invention of tomographic 
techniques. These, in turn, emerged from the much older techniques of 
X-ray radiography. 
2.2.6 
Classic X-Ray Imaging Procedures 
Before considering some of the wonderful new three-dimensional tech­
niques for examining brain structure and function, we need to under­
stand both the power and the limitations of the classic X-ray imaging 
procedure. The discovery of X rays by Wilhelm Konrad von Roentgen in 
1 895 had an extraordinary impact on the history of modern medicine. 
The Technologies 
57 
The importance of the new technique was immediately recognized, and 
medical X rays were in widespread use within months of Roentgen's 
original report. 
The discovery of X rays is a familiar tale of scientific readiness and 
good luck. Roentgen was working with the Crookes vacuum discharge 
tube when he discovered that mysterious emanations from the tube 
caused some chemicals in his laboratory to luminesce, even though the 
chemicals and the Crookes tube were separated by a lightproof shield. 
Roentgen was awarded the first Nobel prize in physics in 1901, only six 
years after his discovery, clearly indicating the extraordinary importance 
of his discovery and the immediacy of medical appreciation of what it 
signified. 
It is now known that X rays are produced by high-energy electrons 
thermally emitted from a negatively charged and heated filiament (the 
cathode). These negatively charged electrons are attracted to a positively 
charged metal electrode (the anode), which is also contained within the 
same evacuated tube as the cathode. The voltage difference between the 
anode and the cathode accelerates the negatively charged electrons and 
thus increases their kinetic energy. The magnitude of the voltage differ­
ence between the electrodes thus determines the energy with which the 
electrons bombard the anode. When the negative charge on the acceler­
ated electrons interacts with the charged components of the nuclei of the 
atoms of the metal in the anode, the electrons change direction. This 
change of direction itself is the primary source of X rays. According to a 
basic law of electromagnetism, whenever a charged particle (such as an 
electron) is accelerated or decelerated (as it has to be in order to change 
direction), it gives up energy in the form of electromagnetic radiation. In­
deed, a change in the amplitude or direction of movement of charged 
particles is the ultimate source of all electromagnetic radiation, regard­
less of wavelength. This holds true for radio waves as well as for charged 
particles circulating in a synchrocyclotron. "Ultra bright" X rays are pro­
duced by oscillating the position of electrons that are travelling at veloci­
ties near the speed of light (Altarelli, Schlacter, & Cross, 1998). Most 
conventional medical X rays, however, are considerably less energetic 
because they are produced in machines that operate at much lower 
anode-cathode accelerating voltages. 

58 
Chapter 2 
This brings us to the next important point. X rays (wavelength -10-11 
m) are qualitatively no different from any other kind of electromagnetic 
radiation, which differs only in its wavelength, and the energy associated 
with wavelength-from radio waves (- 10-1 m), to infrared (10-5 m), 
visible (-10-7 m), and ultraviolet (- 10-8 m) light, to cosmic rays 
(_ 10-14 m). 
Nevertheless, because electromagnetic radiations of different wave­
lengths have different energies, they also have distinguishable properties. 
For example, they tend to penetrate different materials to varying de­
grees. Thus, even though the human body is mostly opaque to visible 
light, X rays are selectively transmitted through tissues in a way that per­
mits us to visualize what would otherwise be invisible. The wavelengths 
of X rays used in conventional medicine vary from approximately 1 0-10 
to 10-12 m. Measures of wavelength, however, are not traditionally used 
in this field. Rather, this kind of radiation is usually characterized by its 
energy. The relationship between wavelength and energy is defined by 
the following equation: 
E = hf 
(2. 1 )  
where E is energy in electron volts (eV), h is Planck's constant (6.62 X 
10-27 erg sec), and f is the reciprocal of the wavelength of the radiation 
times the speed of light (lIAc). 
The wavelength range of 10-10 to 10-12 m therefore represents an ap­
proximate energy range of from 1 5,000 to 150,000 eY. For convenience, 
this measure is most commonly expressed in thousands of electron volts 
or kilo-electron volts (keV). 
An easier way to make the conversion directly from wavelength to 
kilo-electron volts (keV) is to use the following equation: 
E = 124 keY 
'A 
(2.2) 
where A is the wavelength of the X ray in nanometers (nm), one 
nanometer being equal to 10-9 meter. (Incidentally, the highest-energy 
X rays now being produced are measured in giga-electron volts-or bil­
lions of electron volts.) 
Because the angles at which the electrons are deflected in an X-ray 
tube, and thus the magnitude of their acceleration, varies as a function of 
The Technologies 
59 
the spatial relationship between their trajectory and the position of the 
atomic nuclei of the target metal on the anode with which they interact, a 
given X-ray tube emits X rays across a wide spectrum of energies. In­
deed, a typical medical X-ray spectrum, such as that shown in figure 2.6, 
is continuous from 15 to 120 keY, with a peak determined by the voltage 
applied between the electrodes of the X-ray tube. A few subpeaks may 
occur on the continuous energy spectrum; the actual energy of these 
subpeaks depends on the particular metal of the anode. 
The technology of X-ray equipment design, now almost a century old, 
is well developed. Many factors contribute to the voltage level to be used 
and the design characteristics of the entire system. Filters and shields 
constrain the emissions from the tube to a narrowly collimated beam so 
that good focus can be achieved. The rate at which a given X-ray tube 
can be pulsed is extremely important because of heating limitations and 
the resulting physical deterioration of the anode by the impacting beam 
of electrons. 
One of the most important factors in determining the parameters of 
the X-ray beam is the particular medical application. Most chest and ab­
dominal X rays require relatively high voltage (60-85 keY), although 
mammograms are taken with low-voltage X rays (25-30 keY). Conven­
tional X rays of the brain are usually taken with 70 keY systems. (For 
more technical details about X-ray devices and their use, see Dowsett, 
Kenny, and Johnston, 1998.) 
The traditional means of producing X-ray radiograms is to place the 
patient between the X-ray emitting tube and some material that is sensi­
tive to the emanations. To minimize X-ray exposure to the subject, spe­
cial, highly sensitive photographic films have been developed for X-ray 
recording, and film is still the most common medium for permanent X­
ray records. New X-ray detectors that provide direct data input to com­
puters have even higher sensitivity and permit immediate reading of the 
radiograph. Thus, if it is necessary to take another X ray, it can be done 
without having to recall the patient at some later time. 
Such a record, whether made on film or by a one-shot data-entry de­
vice, is only a static, two-dimensional snapshot. The process of dynamic 
fluoroscopy (real-time observation of X-ray images) requires a sensitive 
screen that can convert continuous X rays into a moving TV-like image. 

60 
1; 
en 
z 
w 
I-
ñ 
w 
2: 
5 
w 
a:: 
Chapter 2 
Figure 2.6 
a, 
50 
ENERGY (keV) 
X-ray emission spectrum of tungsten. Note both the continuous spectrum and 
the spectral lines produced at relatively high keY levels. Drawing by Mary Zhu. 
Fluoroscopes work by reversing the original process-the X rays that 
pass through the patient are converted back to electrons, which then ac­
tivate special fluorescent screens. These screens emit visible light patterns 
for direct observation in exactly the same way a computer terminal or 
TV does. Of course, motion picture cameras can also be used to record 
the images over long periods of time. 
Considerable research has gone into the development of improved im­
aging materials. Engineering laboratories have developed films and other 
sensitive media that require only short and low-level exposures, 
xeroradiographic materials that produce high-contrast images, and 
fluorescent screens that emit higher levels of light (for fluoroscopy). Re­
gardless of their particular makeup, all these materials are designed to re­
cord the distribution of the residual X rays that have passed through the 
The Technologies 
61 
object or person interposed between the tube and the sensitive material. 
Tissues or materials that absorb X rays more strongly allow fewer X rays 
to pass through to the sensitive film or screen than do tissues or materials 
that absorb less strongly. 
It is clear, therefore, that even at its best an X-ray radiogram of the 
kind we are describing is a dim shadowgraph of whatever is interposed 
between the X-ray tube and the sensitive medium. If the beam spot is 
well collimated (that is, if it consists of a beam of parallel rays) and the 
spot size is relatively small, a reasonably sharp image of the cumulative 
vertical absorption of the intervening tissue can be produced. Bones, 
bodily fluids, and other tissues absorb the X rays to different degrees. For 
many purposes, such as the location of a tumor, the determination of a 
break in a bone, or the measurement of the size of a fluid-filled cavity 
within the brain or in one of its blood vessels, the noninvasive nature of 
the X-ray procedure explains why its importance was so immediately 
recognized by Roentgen and those in the medical profession who fol­
lowed him. 
On the other hand, conventional X rays, such as the one shown in 
figure 2.7, do not allow us to "see" the soft tissues of the brain in the de­
tail possible with the newer tomographic techniques: they are only two­
dimensional images of a three-dimensional object; all of the components 
that lie along the path of a ray of the radiation contribute collectively to 
the final density on the exposed film plate. Although one can, of course, 
take another picture and locate something by triangulation or by simple 
stereoscopic procedures, to produce a true, full, three-dimensional image 
of a large portion of the body requires a more elaborate procedure. The 
remainder of this chapter deals with the extraordinary developments in 
noninvasive, three-dimensional imaging that have offered such promise 
to psychology, biology, and medicine in the past few years. 
2.2.7 
Computer-Assisted X-Ray Tomography 
Conventional X rays can be used to generate three-dimensional pictures. 
I have already mentioned that two pictures can be taken from slightly 
different viewpoints and the disparity (differences) between the pictures 
used to produce simple stereograms. Linear tomography, an early ver­
sion of the more powerful computer-aided techniques, is a somewhat 

62 
Chapter 2 
Figure 2.7 
. 
. 
. 
. 
Standard X-ray image of the brain. Note that the brain is barely vIsible wI:h this 
kind of transmission radiogram. From Robinson and Uttal, 1 983, used with the 
permission of the Division of Neuroradiology, Department of Radiology, Univer­
sity of Michigan. 
more intricate procedure in which both the X-ray source and the sensi­
tive film physically move in a coordinated way around a pivot point dur­
ing the exposure. This technique produces a relatively blurred image of 
all of tissues except those lying on the same plane as the pivot point. 
Far more precise three-dimensional images, however, can be created 
using computer-assisted tomography or computerized axial tomogra­
phy-the classic CAT scan, developed independently by physicist Allan 
Cormack and electrical engineer Godfrey Hounsfield, both of whom 
were outside the academic world. Hounsfield worked for an engineering 
firm and Cormack in a hospital when each individually, driven by the 
practical needs of their jobs, invented the tomographic reconstruction 
principle. 
Tomography nowadays refers to a wide variety of reconstruction tech­
niques that can be used to produce three-dimensional images or maps of 
objects that are differentially transparent to several different kinds of 
electromagnetism or radiation. The prefix tomo- refers generally to a vol-
The Technologies 
63 
umetric (i.e., three-dimensional) measures. Tomographic images are 
composed of three-dimensional addressable image locations called 
"voxels" (volume elements), by analogy to the two-dimensional address­
able image locations called "pixels." Three coordinates are required to 
locate a particular voxel. 
All tomographic techniques, regardless of the kind of signals used to 
image the internal structures or hidden processes of body, work by devel­
oping images of single planes within the body. The three-dimensional or 
volumetric map is obtained by imaging a succession of these planes, 
which can then be examined or manipulated in various ways (e.g., by ro­
tation, translation, magnification, or by pseudocoloring) to observe 
other planes of observation not actually measured. For example, a longi­
tudinal slice of measurements through the body may be pooled with 
other such slices to reconstruct a transverse image plane. Even more 
striking is the ability of a tomographic system to reconstruct and visual­
ize a three-dimensional map or model of the inside of a body-all the 
while without violating its physical integrity. 
Tomographic techniques have also been used in geophysics to deter­
mine the structure of the earth, in nuclear physics to examine the con­
tainment pattern of the plasma in a fusion reactor, and even in 
engineering, to examine the material inside an oil pipeline or sewage 
pipe. Anthropologists have used these techniques to look at Egyptian 
mummies or to determine the volume of the brain of an extinct animal 
from its fossilized remains still encased in stone. Recently, a tomographic 
reconstruction of the fossilized heart of a dinosaur suggested that the 
heart was four-chambered and that the dinosaur might therefore be 
warm-blooded. 
Tomography can also scan with acoustical or microwave signals as 
well as with X rays. The major scanning signals with which we are con­
cerned in this book, however, are those to which the interior of the living 
human body, especially the brain, are at least partially transparent, and 
which are therefore selectively absorbed by the body, but not to a degree 
that would cause significant tissue damage. 
The CAT scan (often abbreviated CT scan) differs from other tech­
niques in significant ways. A major step forward from either the stan­
dard X ray or the linear tomographic technique, it makes a large number 
of measurements of low-level X rays emanating from a fan-shaped beam, 

64 
Chapter 2 
as the X-ray tube and a partial or complete ring of radiation detectors ro­
tate around the body. Figure 2.8 diagrams this arrangement, in which 
many measurements are taken through the body at a large number of dif­
ferent orientations. 
At each orientation, each of the detectors picks up a signal that is the 
analogue of a shadowgraph for the single ray from the X-ray tube that 
intersects that particular detector. In this case, however, many such 
"scores" or "values" are accumulated-there are several detectors, sev­
eral rays, and, most important, several positions of the apparatus at the 
different orientations of the tube as it rotates around the body of the pa­
tient. The collection of detector scores at one orientation is referred to as 
a "view." The number of views is determined by the number of rota­
tional steps as the tomographic system rotates. The path taken through 
the body from the X-ray source to one detector is referred as a "ray." 
The number of rays is determined by the number of detectors activated 
at each viewing position. 
Data collected in this manner provide the necessary clues to image a 
single transverse slice of the body. The third dimension (the longitudinal 
axis) is acquired by shifting either the equipment or the patient a small 
distance along the longitudinal axis after each rotation has been com­
pleted. The resulting set of slice images thus produced collectively consti­
tutes the full three-dimensional reconstruction of the examined part of 
the subject's body. After all of the slice images have been reconstructed, 
using straightforward image-processing algorithms, a computer can gen­
erate slice images along other axes and planes from the collected voxel 
information; it can do so for rotations along any axis, not just along the 
three cardinal axes defined by the orientation of the body. 
The thickness and number of the transverse slice images gathered 
along the body depend, respectively, on the thickness of the fan-shaped 
beam and on how far the equipment is shifted along the longitudinal axis 
of the body between each set of rotations. More important, this tech!. 
nique lets us reconstruct a full, three-dimensional map of the body or ob­
ject being examined by taking an appropriately large number of 
measurements. 
To understand how this three-dimensional image is reconstructed, we 
have to understand how a single transverse slice image is produced. The 
The Technologies 
65 
x ray 
,..., 
m62--
-----------
Figure 2.8 
Diagram of a CAT scanning apparatus, showing the single detector positioned in 
the path of the X-ray beam. From Robinson and Utta1 1983. 
amount of data to define one transverse slice image gathered in one rota­
tion around the body can be very large. 
The trick is to go from this very large database to an viewable two­
dimensional image for each transverse slice by means of a process called 
"reconstruction." Consider what happens when X rays pass through an 
enclosed high- and low-density object, respectively. X rays passing 
through the high-density object are much reduced in amplitude, produc­
ing lower-values measurements in the detectors, whereas X rays passing 
through the low-density object are less reduced in amplitude, producing 
higher-value measurements. This phenomenon allows the CAT scan de­
vice to reconstruct an image. As just noted, the goal is to go from this 
melange of overlapping readings to a spatially accurate map of the trans­
verse slice. This process produces a picture exemplified in a much­
reduced form in figure 2.9. The first step in tomographic reconstruction 
is to organize the data into a two-dimensional matrix, with the detector 
values for each ray forming one axis and the number of each view form­
ing the other. This matrix is represented in a digital computer as a very 
large database of pixels, although the data remain in a raw form and 
must be processed to produce a usable image. 
One way to accomplish this is simply to apply what is called 
"backprojection" algorithm: all values of the rays for all the views are 
simply added together, and this sum used for all the pixels along that 

66 
Chapter 2 
A3 
A4 
Figure 2.9 
Diagram of CAT and PET tomographic techniques. The amount of radiation de­
tected at each detector (A1-A4) depends on the combined density of the tissue in 
the pathway of the various rays to the detector. For example, ray 1 will be most 
heavily attenuated and ray 4 will be least heavily attenuated. These differences 
can be analyzed to produce the striking three-dimensional maps of the brain. 
Drawing by Mary Zhu. 
particular ray. In the simplest implementation of such an algorithm, the 
values of all the rays passing through a particular point in the two­
dimensional array mapped by the tomographic process would be added 
together. Where a dense object was located, a lighter band would appear, 
indicating that less radiation had made its way through to the detector. 
Where a less dense object was located, a darker region would appear in­
dicating that more radiation had made it through to the detector. In this 
manner, dark and light spots would appear in the reconstructed image 
corresponding to the denser and less dense regions of the image. 
(The third dimension, as I have already noted, is obtained by physically 
shifting the entire apparatus with respect to the imaged part of the body.) 
The problem with this simple backprojection technique is that it pro­
duces a seriously blurred image, one contaminated with streaks and 
starlike patterns of false images caused by the overlap of the various rays 
and the rotational geometry of the typical tomographic system. Back­
projection images can, however, be cleaned up to a substantial degree 
by preprocessing the data with Fourier transforms and high-pass spatial 
frequency filtering, or by convolving the original data with what is essen­
tially an edge-enhancing kernel. 
The Technologies 
67 
Another classic technique for processing data of this kind is to use a 
transformation invented by Radon ( 1917) that was originally designed 
to detect straight lines in much the same way as the more familiar Hough 
transform. A reverse form of the Radon transform can be used to convert 
lines (such as the cumulative values constructed along the rays in the 
backprojection procedure) into regions of varying density in a domain 
defined by p and e, where p is the distance to the origin and e is the angle 
of p with respect to a perpendicular of the original line. The cumulative 
values along a ray are thus transformed into points in the Radon space; 
by accumulating a set of these points, an image of the slice of the object 
can be formed. 
Although the mathematics of tomographic reconstruction are some­
times arcane, this qualitative discussion should give readers at least a 
sense of what is being accomplished in a CAT scan (see figure 2.10 for an 
actual CAT scan of a brain). 
Figure 2.10 
Image of the human brain produced by a CAT scanning procedure. The black re­
gions are bone. Used with the permission of J. E. Faulkner, Medical Imaging, 
Good Samaritan Hospital, Phoenix, Arizona. 

68 
Chapter 2 
We need to appreciate three drawbacks of this procedure, however. 
First, like a conventional X ray, the CAT scan produces only anatomical 
information. That is, it tells us nothing about the functions of the system, 
only something about its physical structure. Like the conventional X ray, 
it may be extremely useful in detecting or studying structural abnormali­
ties such as tumors or broken bones. It may even be useful to guide the 
course of surgery, but for several reasons it cannot tell us what the sys­
tem is doing. For one, however complex, a CAT scan simply detects rela­
tive X-ray opacity; for another, it takes a considerable amount of time to 
carry out even one scan. 
Second, a relatively powerful computer is needed to process the huge 
mass of data forthcoming from a CAT scan apparatus to produce reason­
ably high-resolution pictures such as those shown in figure 2.10. And 
third, the procedure exposes the body to high levels of radiation, al­
though lower than some other X-ray procedures because of the high sen­
sitivity of the CAT scan detectors. 
Having noted the CAT scan procedure's drawbacks, we should remem­
ber that all of the X-ray and tomographic techniques discussed in this 
chapter have one enormous advantage-they are all noninvasive: no sur­
gery is required to peer into the insides of a living human body. For ex­
amining anatomical structure, whether normal or abnormal, these 
techniques represent a breakthrough of epochal consequence. Only re­
cently have psychologists been able to take advantage of these impressive 
engineering developments, as analogous techniques to explore the func­
tion as well as the structure of the nervous system have emerged. We turn 
now to one of the first of these functional techniques. 
2.2.8 
Positron Emission Tomography 
Another means of providing the penetrating signals necessary for tomog­
raphy is to introduce a radioactive substance into the body and to use the 
energy emitted during radioactive decay as the means of generating a 
similar three-dimensional image of the interior of the body. This is the 
basic idea behind positron emission tomography (PET). 
The PET scanning technique has one enormous advantage over the 
conventional X-ray and CAT techniques. Whereas those two older tech­
niques depend on the selective absorption of the X rays by the anatomi-
The Technologies 
69 
cal structures of the body, the PET scan technique allows us to examine 
the functions carried out by various parts of the body (including-and 
most germane for this book-the brain) by injecting specially selected 
radioactive substances into the body for the study of specific metabolic 
activities. The basic assumption on which the psychological applications 
of the PET scan technique is based is that, with a radioactive tracer, the 
amounts of a substance metabolized by the brain can be indirectly mea­
sured to show which regions are actively metabolizing that substance 
and which are not. Alternatively, again with a radioactive tracer, the 
amount of blood flowing to a particular region may also be correlated 
with activity in the region. The use of the fluctuating blood supply as an 
indicator of localized brain activity is based on the additional assump­
tion that blood flow is directly correlated with the amount of oxygen­
consuming neural metabolic activity taking place. This assumption is, in 
turn, based on the observation that metabolites are oxidized in greater 
amounts by active cells than by inactive ones. Thus the oxygen flow to 
active areas must be greater where there is more activity-and, thanks to 
selective uptake of the radioactive tracer, more radioactivity as well, than 
where there is less. This chain of assumptions holds not just for neurons 
but for all cells in the body. The next link in this chain is to assume that 
the site of a particular cognitive activity is where neural activity is great­
est. This assumption, however, is nowhere as clear-cut as the metabolic 
ones that preceded it. 
If detectors sensitive to the energy emitted during enhanced metabolic 
activity or blood flow are appropriately placed, and tomographic tech­
niques similar to the ones described are appropriately applied, then im­
ages of both structure and function can be obtained from the PET 
technique. The following paragraphs flesh out this bare-bones descrip­
tion of the process. 
To understand how PET scan images, which are the product of several 
different sciences acting together, can be used to localize cognitive pro­
cesses in the brain, we must, first, know something about the biochemis­
try of metabolism in the area of interest-for us, the brain. Second, we 
must know something about radioactive decay and the detection of the 
particles emitted when nuclei break down. Third, we must integrate this 
knowledge with the mathematics and computer data processing of 

70 
Chapter 2 
tomography, already briefly introduced. Finally, we must know some­
thing about the localization problem and the enormous advantages 
and disadvantages of the extensive technology and physics being applied 
to it. 
First, let us briefly consider the biochemistry of the brain. Neuronal ac­
tivity is, for the most part, is thought to be energized by the oxidation of 
glucose. The relevant part of this metabolic activity takes place mainly at 
neural synapses, where the transmitter substances are presynaptically 
created, diffused, and then captured by postsynaptic receptor sites. If a 
region of the brain is neurologically active, the consumption of glucose 
by and the blood flow to that region are both higher than normal, the 
latter being functionally dependent on the former. If, however, the region 
is neurologically inactive, both indicators are low. It has now been estab­
lished (Roland, 1993) that the two measures are closely related and ei­
ther or both can be used to determine the amount of activity in a 
particular region of the brain. In current practice, blood flow, which can 
measured faster and easier than the metabolic rate per se, is the preferred 
indicator of brain activity in a PET scan. 
It is important to remember that, because the PET scan is primarily a 
measure of localized metabolic activity, it is particularly weak at discrim­
inating between regions that may have substantially different tissue 
structures and functions if they are metabolizing at the same rate. More 
important, it cannot distinguish between different cognitive processes if 
they are encoded in the same place but by very different neural network 
arrangements. A PET scan can tell us only where something is happen­
ing, not what is happening there. Indeed, to distinguish between different 
functions, other, more problematic logical and methodological assump­
tions must be accepted. 
The initial task in a PET scan is to pick a radioactive tracer that can be 
used to measure blood flow. Currently, blood flow tracers include gases, 
such as krypton or carbon dioxide, and liquids, as strange as O-Butanol 
or as familiar as water, that either are or contain radioactive isotopes. 
Roland, Kawashima, Gulyas, and O'Sullivan ( 1 995) give a concise and 
lucid discussion of the various metabolic tracer substances that have 
been used in PET scanning in recent years. According to them, the cur-
The Technologies 
71 
rently preferred tracer substance for the study of blood flow in the brain 
is the radioactive form of water H2015. 
A normal, nonradioactive isotope of oxygen (016) has sixteen nuclear 
particles (i.e., its mass number is 16) and is quite stable. A highly unsta­
ble radioactive isotope of oxygen (015) with only fifteen nuclear particles 
(mass number 15) can be produced by bombarding nitrogen with a beam 
of protons from a particle accelerator, usually a small cyclotron. When 
this 015 is combined with hydrogen it produces radioactive water 
(H2015). 
The unstable and radioactive isotope 015 tends to decay spontaneously 
and quickly back to the stable isotope N15 having fifteen protons and 
neutrons. The half-life of 015 is 2.04 minutes; that is to say, half of the re­
maining unstable atoms decay every two minutes. This is the reason that 
hospitals must now have their own particle accelerators situated near the 
PET scan lab. The unstable H2015 must be quickly injected into the sub­
ject before it decays. This disadvantage is overcome by two advantages. 
The radiation level is sufficiently high and the decay rate sufficiently fast 
for measurements to be made and for any residual radiation to quickly 
clear the body of the patient or subject. 
The critical feature that makes the PET scan work is that the spontane­
ous decay of an 015 atom is accompanied by the emission of a positron­
the positively charged antiparticle of the more familiar electron. The pos­
itron cannot exist for long among the negatively charged and much more 
numeroʓs electrons in the environment; indeed, as soon as it encounters 
a stray electron, the two annihilate each other. A "typical" positron trav­
els only a few millimeters in brain tissue before being annihilated. Never­
theless, this relatively short distance is sufficient to degrade the PET 
image. The resulting blurring of the image occurs in part because the crit­
ical events-the decay of the oxygen atom and the annihilation of the 
positron as it combines with an electron do not occur at exactly the same 
place. 
All is not lost however. The mutual annihilation of the positron from 
the decaying 015 atom and a fortuitously available electron gives rise to 
a pair of gamma rays that must, in accord with the laws of conserva­
tion of momentum and energy, travel off in exactly opposite directions. 

72 
Chapter 2 
Furthermore, the two gamma rays must together have exactly the same 
amount of energy that was present in the positron and electron pair prior 
to their mutual annihilation. The key to understanding how the PET 
scan technique works is appreciating that simultaneity and diametrical 
opposition are both necessary to determine than an 015 atom has actu­
ally decayed, namely, that a gamma ray detected is a consequence of that 
decay and not just some random, unpaired event. To summarize the dis­
cussion thus far, the number of 015 atoms that decay is taken to indicate 
the amount of blood flow at a particular location, and the amount of 
blood flow is taken to indicate the amount of brain activity at that loca­
tion-which is what we set out to measure in the first place. 
To determine that an 015 atom has really decayed and that a detected 
gamma ray is not random requires ( 1 )  that two gamma rays be detected; 
(2) that the two gamma rays be detected simultaneously; and (3) that 
they be detected traveling in opposite directions on the same line. If 
all three conditions are met, the information obtained can be used to 
generate the basic data for the PET scanning operation-the line of 
response. 
Task 1 ,  detection, is accomplished by the hardware. Typically cylindri­
cal and circular in cross section, a PET scan device is set up so that the 
subject can be inserted into its center. Figure 2.11 diagrams the various 
components of such a device, including a ring of crystal detectors (made 
up of photosensitive substances such as bismuth germanate or sodium io­
dide). For each gamma ray detected, the crystal detectors generate an­
other photon with a lower energy than either one of the photons created 
by the positron-electron annihilation. The flash of light produced by the 
secondary photon generated is amplified by a photomultiplier tube to 
produce an electronic signal. 
Tasks 2 and 3 are accomplished by special coincidence circuitry, which 
determines that detectors exactly opposite each other have been acti­
vated at exactly the same time. As noted, the temporal and spatial coinci­
dence of the signals establishes the line of response-the basic data for 
subsequent computer processing. It is from a database built up of all of 
the measured lines of response that the three-dimensional reconstruction 
of the tissue image depends. This database is computer-processed using 
algorithms and procedures that, for all practical purposes, are the same 
a-photon track 
Figure 2.11 
The Technologies 
73 
One of a pair of 
opposed detectors 
Diagram of PET apparatus, showing the diametrically opposed coincidence de­
tectors that must be simultaneously activated to detect a pair of photons marking 
the anmhllatIon of a posItron from a radioactive tracer in the subject's body. 
From Robinson and Dttal, 1983. 
as those described for the CAT scan. The images may also be sharpened 
by Fourier filtering or some other edge-enhancing or sharpening algo­
rithm to produce the classic PET scan display. Figure 2.12 shows a typi­
cal PET image reconstructed from processing all of the lines of response 
obtained during a PET scanning procedure. 
PET scan images must be clearly distinguished from CAT scan images. 
The PET scan measures differences in metabolism, whereas the CAT scan 
measures differences in anatomy. The PET scan is thus particularly useful 
for the study of neural activity, just as the CAT scan is excellent for the 
study of neural structure. However, the two techniques have one major 
similarity-their final images represent a transverse slices across the lon­
gitudinal axis of the body and, as such, can be pooled and processed to 
produce images along other axes and planes. 
For a long time, the PET scan's ability to produce a functional image of 
metabolic activity was unique. The development of functional magnetic 

74 
Chapter 2 
Figure 2.12 
Image produced by a PET scanning procedure. Used with the permission of E. M. 
Reiman, J. T. Frost, and J. Cong, PET Center, Good Samaritan Hospital, Phoe­
nix, Arizona. 
resonance imaging (fMRI) provided an alternative and sometimes more 
precise means of producing the same kind of functional image. Although, 
along with the conventional X ray, the PET scan will likely have special­
ized uses for some time to come, fMRI has become the procedure of 
choice for cognitive neuroscientists. Let us now consider the extraordi­
nary predecessor of fMRI. 
2.2.9 Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
Conventional X-ray, CAT, and PET scanning procedures all require that 
external energy pass through or be introduced into the body. Although 
ionizing radiation (such as X rays) and radioactive materials (such as 
H2015) post ever smaller risks as detection equipment becomes more sen­
sitive and therefore able to produce useful images with much smaller 
The Technologies 
75 
doses than before, there is still some concern that even very low doses of 
ionizing radiation (whether X rays or positrons) may have a cumulative 
effect on the body of the patient or subject. Early in the history of tomog­
raphy, it would have been almost too much to hope for that a superior 
technique would come along that would pose no such risks and that 
would use the very constituents of the human body to noninvasively pro­
duce a three-dimensional tomographic image of structure, function, or 
both. 
Amazingly, this is exactly what happened with the development of 
magnetic resonance imaging, which certainly ranks among the most im­
portant medical and technological developments ever. MRI equipment 
now provides extraordinarily detailed pictures of the body with neither 
the invasiveness of surgery nor the dangers of ionizing radiation and 
with a clarity that makes many of the older technologies virtually obso­
lete. How the MRI technique came to be developed is a remarkable story 
in itself. 
Magnetic resonance imaging can be traced to discoveries made in the 
mid-twentieth century by three groups of physicists: Rabi, Zacharias, 
Millman, and Kusch ( 1 937, 1939), Purcell, Torrey, and Pound ( 1 946), 
and Bloch, Hansen, and Packard ( 1 946). Unlike Roentgen's discovery of 
X rays, the early discoveries of these scientists were neither totally unex­
pected nor unprecedented. Nevertheless, although based on the remark­
able quantum theories of the 1920s and 1930s, these discoveries led to a 
practical application-MRI imaging-that no one initially expected. 
Rabi et al. ( 1 937, 1939) originally discovered the phenomenon of nu­
clear magnetic resonance (NMR) and developed a method for measuring 
the magnetic moment of the atomic nucleus-the basis of the modern 
MRI device. To do so, they used a beam of ions, accelerated in the same 
manner in which electrons were accelerated in a Crookes tube, an X-ray 
tube, or, for that matter, even in a modern TV. Later, Purcell et al. ( 1 946) 
and Bloch et al. ( 1 946) almost simultaneously developed a similar tech­
nique for measuring the same magnetic moment phenomenon in "con­
densed" -solid-matter. 
To understand how these esoteric physical phenomena were manipu­
lated to create an output signal to produce the same structural and func­
tional information provided by CAT and PET scanning procedures, we 

76 
Chapter 2 
need to examine the terms that make up nuclear magnetic resonance. 
The first term, nuclear, refers to phenomena involving the nuclei of 
atoms. Which leads us directly to the second term, magnetic. Whereas 
the color of light emitted by an agitated atom, for example, a thermally 
excited tungsten atom, is determined by the properties of that atom's 
orbital electrons, NMR is dependent on the magnetic properties of pro­
tons, which along with neutrons are the main components of an atomic 
nucleus. Individual protons, in addition to their electrical properties 
(a proton has a positive charge equal in magnitude to the negative charge 
of an electron), also have a tiny magnetic field with a north and south 
pole and lines of force passing from one of these poles to the other, just 
like a small bar magnet. If the nucleus of an atom has an odd number 
of protons (e.g., hydrogen with 1 proton, nitrogen with 7 protons, or 
phosphorous with 1 5  protons), then that species of atom becomes a 
candidate for the NMR process. The odd number means that there 
will be a net magnetic orientation or polarization in one direction when 
the tiny magnetic fields of all of the protons are aligned. Which particu­
lar atomic species is selected for examination is determined by the fre­
quency of the applied radio frequency signals, to be described later. The 
critical consideration in NMR, the compatibility of the natural frequency 
of the atom with the frequency of the applied radio signals, leads us to 
the third term in NMR-the term used to describe that compatibility-
resonance. 
Because the nucleus of a hydrogen atom consists of only one proton, 
both the analysis and the implementation of the MRI system based on 
NMR concepts are greatly simplified. Because hydrogen is also one of 
the two constituents of a water molecule and the body is made mainly of 
water, the MRI process is mainly an examination of the properties of wa­
ter in our system. This is not to say that the protons of atoms other than 
those in water molecules do not contribute to the imaging process, but 
merely to emphasize that this generally innocuous and certainly ubiqui­
tous constituent of the body (normal, nonradioactive water) provides the 
main physical foundation of the MRI technique. Indeed, there has never 
been any evidence of tissue damage from the strong applied magnetic 
fields, and evidence of only minimum tissue heating from the applied ra-
The Technologies 
77 
dio frequency signals, used in MRI (although, of course, the procedure 
could produce unpleasant results in patients with pacemakers or artificial 
metal hips). 
To return to the details of nuclear magnetic resonance, the magnetic 
poles of the body's protons are randomly oriented in their normal situa­
tion. If, however, a strong magnetic field is applied to the body, after a 
short, but measurable period of time, the magnetic fields of many of the 
protons become aligned to produce a much stronger cumulative mag­
netic field along a common axis. The direction of this axis is determined 
by the strong applied magnetic field, generally produced by a large mag­
net coil that completely encloses the subject's body, although newer 
(open-magnet) systems are becoming available. 
Each of the tiny proton "magnets" has another measurable property in 
addition to its magnetic field orientation-it is also spinning around the 
axis of its magnetic field, in a plane perpendicular to that axis, as shown 
in figure 2.13. The pattern of the spin is not perfect: the proton not only 
spins but also wobbles or precesses about the axis of its magnetic field. 
The degree to which this precession or wobble occurs depends on the 
strength of the large magnetic field originally applied. Indeed, the fre­
quency (F) of precession is precisely defined by the Larmor equation: 
F = a.B, 
(2.3) 
where a. is a property of the individual type of nucleus defined as the ra­
tio of two physical properties of the proton-its magnetic moment and 
the angular momentum of its spin-and B is the strength of the applied 
magnetic field. Thus each species of atom has a particular Larmor 
frequency at which it best absorbs energy, in other words, at which it 
resonates. 
The precession of the magnetic moment of all of the protons acts as an 
radiating antenna in exactly the same way as the change in the direction 
of an electron's trajectory was the source of the radiation we called 
"X rays." The radiation in this case, however, is of a much lower fre­
quency, falling into the range of low-frequency radio waves (approxi­
mately 50 MHz). 
This brings us to the next critical step in the evolution of nuclear mag­
netic resonance into magnetic resonance imaging. In addition to a 

78 
Chapter 2 
Orbit of Precession 
Figure 2.13 
. 
. 
Diagram of the precession of the axis of a proton in a strong magnetic field. ThiS 
precession radiates radio signals at the frequency specified by the Larmor equa­
tion. Drawing by Mary Zhu. 
magnetic field, radio frequency signals are now brought into play--cre­
ated by passing electrical signals of the proper frequency thorough a 
small antenna (i.e., another coil of wire) positioned close to the previ­
ously magnetized tissue. These radio frequency signals produce a second, 
although smaller, magnetic field that slightly changes the direction of the 
cumulative magnetic field of the protons aligned by the large magnetic 
field-and thus also the precession of their magnetic moment. The 
change in precession in turn causes a change in the radio frequency sig­
nals radiated by the cumulative magnetic field. 
In the procedure of choice, as the smaller magnetic field produced by 
the small coil is pulsed-turned on and off-the cumulative magnetic 
field of the tissue is first changed from, then allowed to relax back to the 
original state induced by the large magnet. The critical effect here is that, 
as the precession of the aligned protons in the cumulative magnetic field 
relaxes back to the original state determined by the large magnetic field, 
the radio frequency signals emitted by the cumulative magnetic field also 
change. 
The radio frequency signals radiated from the precessing cumulative 
magnetic moment of the tissue under study can be picked up by the same 
small coil antenna that transmitted the pulsed radio frequency signals. 
The strength of these radiated signals depends chiefly on 
The Technologies 
79 
1 .  the resonant (i.e., same-frequency) relationship between the pro­
cessing magnetic moment of the aligned protons and the pulsed radio 
frequency signals; 
2. the number and density of moving or mobile protons; and 
3. tissue motion. 
The key to understanding this complex process is the nature of the 
changing magnetic moment as it relaxes back to its normal state at the 
end of the radio frequency pulse. Two measures can be made of what 
happens during this relaxation time: the longitudinal time constant (TI ) 
and the transverse time constant (T2). 
TI refers to changes that occur in the direction of (i.e., parallel to) 
the large magnetic field. Thus, after the application of the small radio 
frequency pulse, the spontaneous return of the magnetic moment to 
the direction specified by the large magnetic field is measured. TI varies 
substantially with tissue type-the essential property permitting the 
construction of the MRI map of inaccessible parts of the body. TI is a 
number representing how fast the magnetic moment "relaxes" back to 
the original precessional state determined by the initial large magnetic 
field. This relaxation process is precisely defined by the properties of 
its constituents. Like other time constant measures, TI is determined 
as the time it takes for the relaxation to recover all but 37 percent of 
its original orientation (the usual way of dealing with an asymptotic 
curve.) 
T2, although a similar measure of the time constant of a relaxation 
process, is a function of the relaxation along the plane perpendicular to 
the applied large magnetic field, rather than along it. T2 is also depend­
ent on tissue types and their constituent molecules. For both TI and T2, 
the relaxation process involves the transfer of energy to the surrounding 
tissues, and this transfer depends on the molecular structure of these tis­
sues. T2 is considerably more complicated than TI because the perpen­
dicular or transverse relaxation occurs at different speeds for protons of 
the different atoms and thus also molecules of different tissues. Protons 
in tissues with long T2 time constants ultimately produce bright regions 
in the final images; those in tissues with short T2 time constants produce 
darker regions. 

80 
Chapter 2 
Thus far, we have concentrated on how signals may be obtained from 
the body to produce a tomographic image by manipulating the magnetic 
and radio frequency energies applied to it. A brief summary may be 
helpful. 
1 .  The tissues under study (for us, the brain) are placed in a strong mag­
netic field to align the protons of the constituent atomic nuclei along a 
single magnetic axis or direction. This is necessary because the magnetic 
moment of many randomly oriented protons would simply cancel each 
other out and produce no measurable magnetic field or effect. 
2. The protons precess about the magnetic axis defined by this strong 
magnetic field at a frequency determined by the Larmor equation. 
3. After the protons are aligned by the large magnetic field, a pulse of ra­
dio frequency signals is applied from a small coil antenna, creating its 
own smaller magnetic field. This smaller field, by temporarily 
misaligning the magnetic moments of the protons from the uniform di­
rection induced by the large magnetic field, changes their precessional 
state. 
4. When the radio frequency pulse terminates, the protons tend to relax 
back to the direction of the strong magnetic field, again changing their 
precessional state, which causes them to emit radio waves with particu­
lar frequencies (radio frequency signals) and time-constant decay 
properties.3 
5. These radio frequency signals can be measured to determine two time 
constant values (T1 and T2) for the tissues being scanned and thus pro­
vide the raw data necessary to produce a three-dimensional image. 
6. Depending on the particular application of the MRI procedure, either 
the T1 or the T2 scores can be used to image the tissues. 
It was the monumental development of an idea by Raymond 
Damadian ( 1971 ) that gave rise to the currently ubiquitous MRI device. 
The essential details of this remarkable leap from pure physics to clinical 
device can be briefly related (for the exciting story in considerably more 
detail than is appropriate here, see Mattson & Simon, 1996). 
3. In practice, two kinds of radio frequency pulses are applied-one that pro­
duces a 90-degree deviation and one that produces a 1 80-degree deviation in the 
angle of precession. By varying the interval between the radio frequency pulses 
and by combining the 90-degree and 1 80-degree pulses at appropriate intervals, 
one can map out the image of a transverse slice of the human body, with different 
tissues represented by different image intensities. 
The Technologies 
81 
Damadian's hope was that certain tissue, particularly cancerous tissue, 
might produce T1 and T2 relaxation values that differed from those of 
normal tissue. Using a newly developed type of NMR device (earlier ver­
sions had been around for over a decade), Damadian ( 1 971 ) showed that 
test tube portions of tumors from a cancerous rat produced much higher 
T1 measurements than did normal rat tissue. In this same paper, he also 
reported that a variety of normal tissues each produced different relax­
ation times. From these different T1 and T2 values came the insight that 
different tissue types would produce different image intensities. 
Damadian went to on to suggest the next important logical step­
extending what were previously only "test tube" experiments to experi­
ments on the intact human body. To take that step, he and his colleagues 
would develop and patent a practical MRI device in 1972. 
The first whole-body MRI images produced by Damadian and his col­
leagues required an enormous amount of ingenious practical engineer­
ing. Because none of the magnets and many of the other devices required 
for a working MRI system were available off the shelf, they had to be 
hand built by Damadian and his group. It was not until 1977 that they 
were able to make the measurements that allowed them for the first time 
to produce a primitive map of the inside of a living human body without 
any kind of invasive surgery or ionizing radiation. 
From that point on, the advantages of magnetic resonance imaging 
over other techniques were so obvious that a number of commercial cor­
porations immediately entered the fray, committing huge engineering 
teams and enormous capital to the development a marketable MRI de­
vice, although it should be noted that many other engineers and scientists 
also helped develop modern MRI scanning equipment. 
The recitation of Damadian's contribution, however, is not the end of 
the story. There is one question yet to be answered. How are the mea­
surements of the T1 and T2 relaxation time constants converted into a 
spatial map of a slice of the body? In other words, with all of the relax­
ation radio frequency signals being emitted at the same time from many 
places, how do you tell which signal comes from which place? 
Damadian's original device did it the hard way. The device was ar­
ranged so that the measurements were made a particular point in the 
body-the so-called sweet spot. The resolution of this image was not 

82 
Chapter 2 
very good-about the size of a pea. Then, to measure the NMR response 
at some other point, the subject was physically moved to translate the 
sweet spot to another place in the subject's body. In this manner, by re­
peatedly moving the subject about inside the magnet in all three dir,nen­
sions and taking measurements each time, an anatomical map could be 
laboriously produced. 
Modern techniques of creating an image from T1, T2, or both mea­
surements are based on a quite different idea, originally formulated by 
Paul C. Lauterbur, who suggested that a gradient magnetic field be im­
posed on the strong, aligning magnetic fieJd. (A gradient MRI field is one 
that systematically changes across the subject.) This idea, combined with 
the back-projection method we have already discussed and other subse­
quently developed mathematical tools, made the radio frequency signals 
(radiated by the protons as they relaxed back from the perturbed state to 
the orientations defined by the large magnetic field) dependent on their 
spatial location. Lauterb;'u began work on this important development 
about the same time that Damadian was doing his pioneering work in 
1971, but did not publish his technique until two years later (Lauterbur, 
1973). 
Lauterbur's technique ( 1973) depended on the fact that, whereas all 
the radio frequency signals emitted by all the protons would be the same 
if all were in the same strength magnetic field, their frequencies would 
differ if the magnetic field was not the same everywhere. Thus, by using a 
nonhomogeneous field with gradients of magnetic strength, one could in­
terpret the emitted frequency differences in terms of different positions 
inside the body. In this manner, both the subject and the magnet used 
in an NMR whole-body scan could remain in the same position and 
the scanning necessary to make one slice image done entirely electro­
magnetically. 
If the magnetic field is kept constant over the body, however, then the 
emitted signals depend on the substances present in the body. In this 
manner, the anatomical structure of the system can be examined to pro­
duce information like that obtained from an X-ray CAT scan. 
As easy as it is to express these ideas, the problem of extracting the 
image from the measurements was far from simple. It took a number of 
further developments to arrive at a complete system capable of full, 
The Technologies 
83 
three-dimensional imaging. Imposing a controlled gradient of field 
strength on the main magnetic field (as opposed to keeping it uniform) 
was ultimately accomplished with three additional small coils at right an­
gles to each other, each addirig a linear gradient (positive on one side, 
negative on the other, and zero in the middle) to the main mag.netic field. 
Although, typically, these gradients are only one thousandth as strong as 
the main magnetic field, this is enough for the emitted radio frequency 
signals to provide the necessary spatial localization information. By con­
trolling the order in which these additional coils are aʔtivated and how 
they are combined, one can produce an image of any one of the three 
planes along which the body is oriented. 
The resultant complex patterns of radio frequency relaxation re­
sponses produced by the controlled gradients of the magnetic fields are 
subjected to Fourier analysis and computer-processed to produce a final 
MRI image, such as that shown in figure 2.14. With vastly improved 
color-added and three-dimensional imaging methods, the results ob­
tained are extraordinary. MRI images have replaced exploratory surgery 
in what must be considered one of the most significant medical advances 
ever. (For the technical details of how patterns of radiated radio fre­
quency signals are transformed into a pictorial display, see Dowsett 
et aI., 1 998.) 
One major psychological problem remains. A modern MRI device in­
volves a family of five different concentric coils; the engineering is so de­
manding and the design so restricted by the physical principles involved 
that, for a full-body MRI scan, the subject must be placed in a narrow, 
coffinlike tube. Anyone who has been in such a device knows how un­
comfortable this may be, given the prolonged time (often more than an 
hour) required to accumulate all of the necessary information to recon­
struct an image. This seemingly irrelevant detail has made the device very 
inhospitable for many people. Although newer, open devices have been 
designed and constructed, they do not yet provide the same precise reso­
lution available from traditional MRI systems. 
The spatial resolution of a modern MRI scanning device is now finer 
than a cubic millimeter. Because of its high precision and sharp contrast, 
and because it involves no ionizing radiation or radioactive materials, 
MRI has become a centerpiece of modern medicine in less than a decade. 

84 
Chapter 2 
Figure 2.14 
Image produced by the MRI scanning procedure. Used with the permission of 
E. Reiman, J. T. Frost, and J. Cong, PET Center, Good Samaritan Hospital, 
Phoenix, Arizona. 
Magnetic resonance imaging is without question among the crown jew­
els of medical science, ranking with anesthesia, germ theory, and anti­
biotics. The original motivation of Damadian and Lauterbur was to 
develop a means of detecting abnormal (cancerous) tissue. This very 
practical goal was achieved beyond even their most extreme expecta­
tions-MRI devices are now used routinely to scan for metastatic can­
cers-but it is the applications of MRI to other fields of medicine and to 
the neurosciences that have produced some of the biggest surprises. 
Again, it must not be overlooked that this profoundly humane medical 
development was based on the purest kinds of basic physical research­
research that had no inkling that so obscure a phenomenon as the mag­
netic resonance of protons could play such an important role in improv­
ing the quality of human life. 
Thus far, we have spoken of MRI as a tool for studying the structure of 
the brain. Amazingly, and of greatest relevance to the main goal of this 
The Technologies 
85 
book, it can also be used to study the function of various regions; it is to 
this topic we now turn. 
2.2.10 Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
When the PET scanning technique was discussed earlier in this chapter, it 
was pointed out that the radioactive decay of a particular type of elemen­
tal material-OI5--could be used to indicate its concentration at various 
locations in the brain. Because the concentration of oxygen was corre­
lated with the blood flow to the region under study, the blood flow with 
glucose metabolism, and glucose metabolism with neural activity in that 
particular region, the PET scan could be used to measure that activity. 
With a slightly different chain of correlations, MRI can also be used to 
observe which regions of the brain are active. When used to determine 
the function, as opposed to the anatomical structure, of the brain or any 
other portion of the body, MRI is referred to as "functional magnetic res­
onance imaging" (fMRI). 
Unlike the PET scan, however, fMRI measures, not the radioactivity of 
015, but the difference in relaxation time constants of two different kinds 
of hemoglobin: oxygenated hemoglobin (in blood carrying oxygen to the 
cells of the body) and deoxygenated hemoglobin (in blood returning 
from those cells to the lungs). A molecule of oxygenated hemoglobin, for 
obscure reasons, responds only weakly to an applied magnetic field, 
whereas a molecule of deoxygenated hemoglobin responds quite 
strongly. The key to using fMRI to determine the relative amounts of oxy­
genated blood is thus to distinguish the strong magnetic susceptibility of 
deoxygenated hemoglobin from the weaker susceptibility of oxygenated 
hemoglobin. To accomplish this task, another measure often used to 
evaluate the effect of a radio frequency pulse, T2" ,  the time constant of 
the relaxation that occurs in a nonhomogenous magnetic field, is the in­
dicator of choice. With all other properties and procedures of remaining 
the same as in MRI, fMRI is simply tuned to measure T2" and to provide 
radio frequency pulses that can perturb the precessional frequencies of 
protons within hemoglobin. 
The specific effect of increased neural activity is thus to increase the 
amount of deoxygenated hemoglobin, which is reflected in a greater 
value for T2 * ,  and thus stronger radio frequency signals from the active 

86 
Chapter 2 
region compared to inactive regions. Because the absolute value of the 
differences measured, and ultimately converted to image intensities, is 
rather small, most fMRI data have to be processed by subtracting a set of 
"rest" data from those obtained when the subject was carrying out the 
task of interest. (We shall consider the key role played by this subtractive 
method later when we examine attempts to correlate mental states and 
activity in particular parts of the brain.) 
To summarize, like the PET scan, fMRI provides a means of indirectly 
estimating the amount of neural activity in regions of the brain, working 
from a logical chain of correlations. Additional brain activity leads to 
higher glucose metabolism, which leads to high oxygen demand, which 
leads to higher blood flow. As the oxygen in the newly arrived blood is 
used up, the hemoglobin changes from a form that is not magnetically 
susceptible to one that is. The change in T2" values as oxygenated hemo­
globin becomes deoxygenated can be measured and the data converted 
to an image showing the functional, as opposed to the anatomical, prop­
erties of the human brain. 
The technology of fMRI scanning is changing very rapidly. Recent dis­
cussions of current progress in both the technology and its applications 
can be found in 'Yuasa, Prichard, and Ogawa's review ( 1998) and at 
Hornak's web site ( 1 999). Reiman, Lane, Van Patten, and Bandetti 
(2000) provide another lucid discussion of the PET and fMRI technolo­
gies. Of particular interest is event-related fMRI (see page 194). Further­
more, new techniques are appearing on the scene that use both magnetic 
and optical sensors. For example, a number of novel optical techniques 
using near infrared light or visible light have been developed recently. 
Gratton and Fabiani ( 1 998) review the advantages and disadvantages of 
these techniques; Koizumi, Yamashita, Mai, Ito, and Watanabe ( 1998) 
describe their method for looking at blood flow with optical methods. 
The fMRI technique, which has attracted much attention in recent 
years among psychologists and neuroscientists, provides the basis for a 
surprisingly large portion of the corpus of modern psychobiological 
work. It is particularly important, therefore, that anyone attempting to 
exploit fMRI be aware of the technical details underlying its application. 
With this information in hand, and with an appreciation of the power of 
these extraordinary imaging systems, we can now turn to the other side 
The Technologies 
87 
of the problem. If one is to localize cognitive processes in the brain, one 
must have not only a powerful imaging system (which we clearly have) 
and a nonhomogeneous brain (which no one disputes), but also a very 
clear definition of the cognitive processes being localized. Although it 
may not seem so to most people, psychologists and lay persons alike, 
defining and understanding the psychological aspect of the localiza­
tion task are not as easy as understanding how the sophisticated imag­
ing devices it uses work. In the next chapter, I review the history of 
faculties, mental components, and other ideas about modular cognitive 
processes. 

3 
Is a Taxonomy or Even a Lexicon of 
Cognitive Processes Possible? 
Plurality is not to be assumed without necessity . . . .  What can be done with fewer 
[assumptions] is done in vain with more. 
-William of Ockham 
Entities are not to be multiplied without necessity. 
-Anonymous 
The great interpreter and historian of experimental psychological 
thought E. G. Boring is reputed to have said, ':.!ntelligence is ʕhatJnteut 
gence tests measure. " Herein lies the kernel of the Qb.lem1aced 
'by psychology in general and the essence of the difficulty one faces when 
one attempts to localize mental processes or components in particular 
parts of the brain. The difficulty is that, beyond the physically anchored 
sensory and motor processes, it is has always been extremely difficult to 
define exactly what is meant by a psychological, cognitive, or menta! 
term. Yet, in the search for the brain loci responsible for psychological 
processes, we glibly go about trying to locate some such nebulously , 
defined entity in the three-dimensional space inhabited by the brain. 
Clearly, if what one seeks to localize is itself nebulous and ill defined, 
finding a particular brain locus in which it is uniquely or even partially 
represented is going to pose a considerable challenge-a challenge 
fraught with its own conceptual, technical, and logical difficulties. This 
criticism holds true no matter how precisely the coordinates of the brainl 
regions themselves may be defined. 
• 
How do we deal with this formidable obstacle-ill-defined mental 
modules, faculties, traits, or components? One way is to examine the 

90 
Chapter 3 
vanous psychological processes and mechanisms that have been pro­
posed over the years to see if here is any convergence toward a consen­
sus on what these mĉċltal components might be. In other words, is there 
any scientific basis for a reductive classification of mental components 
that permits us to develop an orderly taxonomy based on sound cladistic 
logic? Knowing either that there is a basis for a taxonomy or that no 
such basis exists because of the unavoidable hypothetical and speculative 
nature of mental components would be extremely helpful in evaluating 
the prospect of localizing mental functions in the brain. Indeed, asking 
this question should have been an essential part of the formative stages 
of the program of brain localization research. 
In pursuing such a question, the difficulty of defining mental processes 
has arisen repeatedly. There is probably nothing that divides psycholo­
gists of all stripes more than the inadequacies and ambiguities of our ef­
forts to define mind, consciousness, and the enormous variety of mental 
events and phenomena. All of us have been involved in disputes that are 
ultimately seen to founder on the definition of mentalist terminologies. 
There is probably no greater source of psychological gobbledygook than 
our disagreements over the meaning of some mental term or, even worse, 
our efforts to show how the brain "produces" (or any other of a host of 
relational terms) "mind." The question j:Ye must answer is whether this 
state of affairs is a fundamental epistemologn or one we 
hav; reas;n to hope can eventually-be-overcome. Determining taxo­
nomic plausibility to the satisfaction of a reasonably large number of my 
colleagues is thus not going to be easy. 
Unlike lepidopterists, who have the relatively simple task of gathering 
and classifying butterflies, psychologists have few such convenient physi­
cal anchors. Organizing the myriad proposed psychological compo­
nents-"butterflies"-of our minds has been and is one of the great 
unfulfilled challenges of our science. Indeed, it is not only unfulfilled; it 
(" 
has not, in my opinion, been adequately engaged. Rather, hypothetical 
psychological constructs are invented ad lib and ad hoc without ade­
quate consideration of the fundamental issue of the very plausibility of 
recise definition. 
Where Čologists have objective measuĊ such as the number of 
legs or wings and the physical types of antennae (as well as the new mea-
[s a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
91 
sures offered by DNA analyses), psychologists have far less objective 
metrics on which to base our definit;he hugely disorganized 
body of processes, ideas, phenomena, and other ephemeral entities that 
psychology confronts is probably far more bewildering than the 1 .5 mil­
lion species of insects currently thought to exist. Psychology does not 
even have simple dimensions such as "number of" or "shape of" along 
which to classify and organize our specimens. 
Boring's astute comment about "intelligence" (the social consequence 
of "who owns intelligence" is well discussed in Gardner, 1999) holds for 
virtually every other psychological or cognitive entity ever discovered, 
described, or hypothesized by any student of the mind. Boring's few 
words point up both the nebulousness of our ideas about what makes up 
mental life and the impossibility of anchoring such nebulous ideas to in­
dependent measurements generally. At best, he is sayingJhat it is only by 
operationalizin our "butterflies" c;n we b to appro;;h definitions 
an 
categories of psychologica function. 
ever lrel-e , :hi i8 -e*actly 
what ps chology does not, in general, do. Indeed, such an objective, op-
.----# 
-
-
-
erational ap roac 
h-m-mrv- nas largely been rejected in recent 
decades. 
There may be no more compelling nutshell argument for the necessity 
of an operational and positivist (and thus, by implication, behaviorist) 
approach to psychological concepts than the one implicit in Boring's 
comment. Although I have dealt with this issue in previous works (Uttal, 
1998, 2000a) and do not wish to belabor the point here, if their efforts 
are ever to bear fruit, mental taxonomists must appreciate that how we 
measure in large part determines what we measure-or, perhaps more 
precisely, what we think we are measuring. For psychology, more than 
any other science, this is a profound problem and one that must be re­
solved before we attempt to identify the behavioral outcomes of experi­
mental protocols with what may only be murky shadows or even 
illusions of real mental processes and mechanisms. 
The tendency to concretize and reify the ephemeral is endemic in psy­
chology. No matter how often or eloquently we are warned about the 
significance of "hypothetical constructs" (e.g., MacCorquodale & 
Meehl, 1 948) the tendency to treat as real that which is, at best ad hoc 
or invented, is pervasive. How often we forget their admonition that 

92 
Chapter 3 
hypothetical cons ucts are inferences, interpretations, subjective judg­
ʖents, descriptivʗ (as opposed to exp ana 
ʝries;-and sometimes 
ru; more than convenient labels. To avoid the all-tʘo-s<:.ducʙive trap ʚf 
letting our inferences become our facts, we must keep in mind that the 
bata on which these inferenceʜe based_ar=- actuallʛ neutral 
with regard to the act 
I mechanisms: an infinite number of behaviorally 
- - -
-- -
indiscriminable alternative inferences and potential mechanisms are pos-
sible, many, perhaps even most, of which are plausible. (For a more com­
plete exposition of this point of view, see Uttal 1998, and the formal 
automata theorems in Moore, 1956.) 
Of course, there are many pragmatic or humanistic arguments that 
what is "real" is what is convenient or useful or what "dignifies" some 
aspect of human existence for reasons above and beyond the strictly sci­
entific. However, the confusion of speculations about what are clearly 
nonunique hypothetical constructs concerning the organization and na­
ture of human cognition with entities that have actually evolved over the 
millions of years of organic evolution almost certainly leads to missteps 
in the development of a valid understanding of the nature of the human 
brain-mind. 
(
There is no better evidence that identifying hypothetical constructs 
with psychobiological realities is a fragile strategy than that reflected in 
ð 
psychology's historical concern with cognitive components. The names 
\ 
for these cognitive components have come and gone along with the fash-
Gons of the times. The centerpiece of a point of view about the nature of 
the human mind in one generation is forgotten or ridiculed in the next. 
Where today, indeed, would one find even the most enthusiastic fMRI re­
searcher searching for Freud's "Id" or Gall's "acquisitiveness?" Never­
theless, psychologists are seeking to localize some equally tentative and 
perhaps equally transitory new hypothetical constructs among the many 
centers and nuclei of the brain. Indeed, vaguely defined concepts such as 
language, emotion, or consciousness, and other mental processes of un­
certain specificity and existence are all too easily deemed both specific 
and "real" enough to be localized in a particular portion of the brain. 
As I suggested earlier, the inadequate and nebulous definition of psy­
chological constructs poses the principal problem for localization re­
search. Let us now review earlier taxonomies to determine whether 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
93 
psychology is convergmg toward a generally acceptable taxonomy of 
mental processes and mechanisms. 
3.1 Previous Taxonomies 
The effort to organize mental processes into some kind of classificatory 
order is not new. Each generation's psychologists or protopsychologists 
seems to have suggested one based on their own contemporary 
worldview. Certainly, from the dawn of language, and perhaps from even 
earlier methods of interpersonal communication, a rich vocabulary or set 
of nonverbal symbols of mental events existed that described experi­
ences, feelings, memories, intents, desires, emotions, and other kinds of 
thought. In prescientific times, when the problems of the mind mainly re­
sided in the domain of philosophy and religion, the concept of mind was 
for the most part dealt with interchangeably with that of the soul; in 
modern times, mind, held to be a function of a physical, mortal brain, 
has been distinguished from soul, held to be immortal and independent 
of the physical body. The Greek philosophers, for example, Plato (d. 347 
B.C.E.) had their own systems of thinking about thinking.1 Augustine 
(354-430) perpetuated what was essentially the Platonic view that the 
soul had certain faculties, such as memory, imagination, reasoning, and 
will, that were responsible for human actions. 
The first formal prototaxonomies of mental processes of the kind I 
wish to consider here, however, arose much later. In what is still one of 
the best histories of scientific psychology, Klein ( 1 970) points out that 
Maimonides ( 1 1 35-1204) had developed a surprisingly complete and 
modern-sounding list of mental faculties. Although there were other, less 
well defined, mental properties about which Maimonides was not as spe­
cific, the following gives the flavor of his taxonomy: 
1. The nutritive faculty, which consisted of 
a. the power of attracting food; 
b. the retention of food; 
1 .  I am indebted to my colleague Professor Sherwin J. Klein for calling my atten­
tion to some of these early faculty psychologies and for commenting on later por­
tions of this chapter. 

94 
Chapter 3 
c. the digestion of food; 
d. the repulsion of superfluities; 
e. growth; and 
f. procreation. 
2. The appetitive faculty (attributed primarily to animals and to the 
primitive aspects of human thought), which consisted of 
a. desire; 
b. love; 
c. hate; 
d. anger; and 
e. fear. 
3. The rational or reasoning faculty (exclusively limited to human 
thought), which consisted of 
a. practical reasoning; and 
b. theoretical reasoning. 
Later, Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679) and Rene Descartes ( 1596-1 650) 
offered their mechanistic theories of the nature of humanity and its rela­
tion to other parts of our world. In particular, it is often overlooked that 
the father of the reductive method, Descartes, championed the idea that 
the mind was more or less indivisible. 
From these early ideas emerged the early associationist theories of the 
British empiricists including John Locke ( 1632-1 704), David Hartley 
( 1705-1 757), Thomas Brown ( 1778-1 820), James Mill ( 1 773-1 836), 
and his son, John Mill ( 1 806-1873), among many others. Not all of the 
proto- and fully developed associationists were convinced of the exist­
ence of separable faculties-Locke, for one, agreed with Descartes about 
the unified nature of mental processes. However, even Locke contributed 
to the evolution of what came to be called "faculty psychology"-the 
idea of mind as a collection of quasi-independent components. 
By the time of the introspective structuralists-Wilhelm Wundt ( 1 832-
1920), Edward Titchener ( 1 867-1927) and the philosopher James Ward 
( 1 843-1 925)-and for much of this century, the prevailing taxonomy in­
cluded a long list of basic serisations that had to be combined by 
associationist processes to produce more complex perceptions, thoughts, 
feelings, and emotions. Even Watson, the great behaviorist (who, as a be­
haviorist, should have been more committed to a holistic point of view) 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
95 
adhered to the idea that the higher levels of cognition were constructed 
in some way from the components of stimulus and response. 
An avalanche of new vocabulary and ideas championing the separate­
ness of the components of mental activity, however, occurred with 
the emergence of modern "cognitive" psychology, the newest version of 
traditional mentalism. The main difference between behaviorism and 
cognitive mentalism is their respective attitudes toward the question 
of the accessibility of mental processes. The behaviorists asserted 
that mind is not directly accessible, whereas the cognitivists asserted that 
it is. 
A second issue distinguishing these two great schools of thought re­
volves around the analyzability of mental processes. Behaviorists argue 
that mental process are unitary and that externally measured responses 
do not therefore allow us to analyze mind into its components, even if 
they do exist (an issue on which behaviorists of different stripes continue 
to disagree.) The core of much cognitive thinking in recent years is just 
the opposite-cognitivists very strongly argue that mind is made up of a 
system of more or less isolatable and independently assayable compo­
nents. Unlike behaviorists, therefore, cognitivists accept that it is plausi­
ble-indeed, 
sensible-to search for the internal structure and 
architecture of the mind as well as that of the brain. 
Many cognitivists assert that they are studying the information­
processing characteristics of the human mind. This technique, they ar­
gue, gives them the opportunity to consider things such as mental maps 
or mental rotation (to name only two). Unfortunately, this information­
processing approach is fraught with the same problems as any other 
mentalism. It assumes that the internal structure can be accessed and an­
alyzed and, as such, is subject to the same criticism as any other reductive 
approach. (For a complete analysis of the distinction between the two 
schools of thought on these issues, see Uttal, 2000a.) 
The mentalist theory that mind is made up of separable and 
identifiable components is clearly stated in a recent book by Pinker 
( 1 997, p. 2 1 ): 
The mind is a system of organs of computation, designed by natural selection to 
solve the kinds of problems our ancestors faced in their foraging way of life, in 
particular, understanding and outmaneuvering objects, animals, plants, and 

96 
Chapter 3 
other people . . . .  The mind is organized into modules or mental organs, each 
with a specialized design that makes it an expert in one arena of interaction with 
the world. The modules' basic logic is specified by our genetic program. Their 
operation was shaped by naturals election to solve the problems of the hunting 
and gathering life led by our ancestors in most of our evolutionary history . . . .  
On this view, psychology is engineering in reverse. In forward-engineering, one 
designs a machine to do something; in reverse-engineering, one figures out what 
a machine was designed to do. 
Pinker is crystal clear here on his commitment to the "modularity and 
separability of mental processes" even if he does not provide us with the 
empirical justification for his version of contemporary cognitive psychol­
ogy. On the basis of that commitment, he vigorously supports the analyt­
ical approach of modern cognitivism-and presumably also the 
localization effort. In so doing, however, he also inadvertently highlights 
the great difficulty faced by localization theorists-the still unsatisfied 
need to sharply demarcate that which is to be localized. 
What we see exemplified in Pinker, 1 997, is the a priori assumption 
that mental modules and "organs" exist and can therefore provide a con­
ceptual basis for the entire localization enterprise. This is done in the face 
of a surprisingly large amount of empirical evidence to the contrary. I ar­
gue here that, by accepting this a priori assumption, psychology abdi­
cates its responsibility as a profession to evaluate the logic of its primary 
fundamental premises-the accessibility and the analyzability of mental 
activity. This is not to say that no one has ever undertaken such an evalu­
ation. Indeed, a few psychologists and scholars who identify themselves 
as philosophers, but who deal with psychological questions, have done 
so. 
One of the most eloquent analyses of the possible existence of mental 
modules was provided by Fodor (1 983), who in his brief, but intellectu­
ally formidable monograph considered many of the target topics of this 
chapter. Among the most important contributions that Fodor made 
was to provide a taxonomy of taxonomies; he proposed (Fodor, 1 983) 
four classes of taxonomies-ways mental processes have been or may be 
categorized: 
1 .  Neo-Cartesian taxonomies. 
These are based on the assumption 
that psychological faculties, like the organs of the body, are innate and 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
97 
thus virtually fixed from the moment of conception.2 Fodor specifically 
highlights Chomsky's view ( 1 980) of language as innate and predeter­
mined, although Fodor argues that Chomsky is actually speaking about 
innate knowledge rather than a material structure and that pieces of 
"knowledge," rather than specific organs, characterize the psychological 
faculties. 
2. Horizontal functional taxonomies. 
These are based on the assump­
tion that behavior is generated by combinations of psychological facul­
ties rather than by the isolated and independent properties of these facul­
ties. According to Fodor, the horizontal taxonomists hold that many 
categories of mental processes involve horizontal interaction between the 
faculties to produce the more familiar psychological entities such as at­
tention or perception. Although the faculties themselves are not applica­
tion specific and can provide inputs to many behaviors or mental pro­
cesses, individually they are constant and stable from one application to 
another, just as the same computer algorithm or "object" may be used in 
many different applications. 
3. Vertical functional taxonomies. 
By contrast, these taxonomies are 
based on the assumption that psychological faculties exist as independ­
ent entities, individually reflecting their nature in the form of highly spe­
cific patterns of behavior. According to Fodor, the vertical taxonomists 
hold that horizontal interaction between these faculties is secondary if it 
occurs at all. He cites modern attempts to link specific behaviors with 
specific brain regions as good examples of a vertical taxonomic 
approach. 
4. Associationist taxonomies. 
These are based on the assumption that 
psychological faculties really do not exist in any general form, but rather 
consist of much 
smaller elements (Fodor suggests that many 
associationists still concentrate on reflexes as these elements) associated 
by an overriding set of common rules or laws. It is these rules or laws 
which must be classified and organized if we are to build a useful taxon­
omy of mental events. 
Although with his taxonomy of mental taxonomies Fodor helps us or­
ganize our own thinking about the fundamental premises of psychologies 
that attempt to modularize mind, this is by no means to suggest that, in 
2. Given Descartes' holistic view of the mind, it is not clear why Fodor chose to 
call this class "Neo-Cartesian." Perhaps, he was emphasizing Descartes' concern 
with the innateness of knowledge and its relation to rationalism, rather than his 
antielementalism. 

98 
Chapter 3 
doing so, he has somehow solved the huge problem faced by psycholo­
gists. As Fodor himself concluded (Fodor, 1983, pp. 104, 38): "There is 
practically no direct evidence, pro or con, on the question whether cen­
tral systems are modular"; indeed, that "our cognitive science has in fact 
made approximately no progress in studying these processes . . .  may 
well be because of their non-modularity." 
If this is so, Fodor went on to say, and if our research methodology is 
necessarily based on a modular strategy, then there may well be pro­
found limits to what we can expect from cognitive psychology. 
So as not to leave us without an epistemological toehold, Fodor in­
voked the more holistic and initially undifferentiated approach of, 
among others, the Gestalt psychologists and the Watsonian and Skin­
nerian behaviorists. This approach denies the innate, traditionally ratio­
nalist argument of all generations of Cartesians in favor of an empiricist 
philosophy that asserted that everything had to be learned and that the 
mind was initially blank. There are no categories or modules of mind, at 
least at first, and those which may develop later are defined by experi­
ence rather than by our genetic heritage. Although the controversy over 
the innate versus the learned aspects of this argument has commanded 
the attention of many psychologists, the most significant current con­
troversy is between proponents of psychobiological modularity, on the 
one hand, and proponents of a holistic and empiricist approach, on the 
other. 
It seems to me that Fodor has made a strong (even if unintended) case 
for a kind of revitalized behaviorism, in which the search for the archi­
tecture of mental processes and mechanisms is recognized as hopeless. It 
also seems to me that Fodor would support the position that attempts to 
localize mental modules in particular brain regions are misdirected and 
that much of cognitive neuroscience research is due for careful reconsid­
eration. I do not agree, however, with his assertion that "convincing ar­
guments for non-modularity should be received with considerable 
gloom." Quite to the contrary, I believe that a full appreciation of what 
can and what cannot be done in psychology would represent one of psy­
chology's crowning achievements. 
It is also somewhat disconcerting to see Fodor's ideas presented as sup­
porting modularity in general, when he is careful to limit modularity to a 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
99 
narrow part of the mental domain-sensory and perceptual processes 
defined by the differential sensitivity of the various receptor organs. 
(I shall consider his contributions in this regard in greater detail later in 
this chapter.) 
The following subsections present a more extensive discussion of the 
specific maps, taxonomies, lists, and lexicons of discrete mental pro­
cesses that have been proposed. 
3.1.1 John Locke's "Ideas" 
The roots of our current theories that thinking is organized as a collec­
tion of quasi-independent modules or faculties can be traced back to the 
writings of the classic Greek philosophers, as I have noted. The trail to­
ward wide acceptance of the concept of components of mind can also be 
discerned in the writings of Thomas Aquinas (1224-1274). Other theo­
logian-philosophers, such as Pierre Gassendi ( 1592-1655) and Christian 
Thomasius ( 1 655-1728), also posed their respective theologies and psy­
chologies in terms of the mind being made up of separable components. 
Regardless of his role as a religionist, each was in the train of ideas that 
led directly to empiricism, a nontheological philosophy asserting the pri­
macy of experience and sensation as the determinants of the contents of 
our mind. 
The British empiricist John Locke ( 1632-1704) was one of the first to 
formulate a more or less modern taxonomy of mental processes. Using 
the word "idea" to characterize mental processes, Locke distinguished 
between simple and complex ideas, and between the primary and sec­
ondary qualities of those ideas. Simple ideas were the basic raw sensa­
tions; complex ideas were formed from combinations of those simple 
ideas. Locke suggested that complex ideas could be reorganized into new 
versions, whereas simple ideas, constrained by their physical foundations 
and the biology of our nervous systems, always produced the same uni­
form mental response. 
Although Locke's distinction between primary and secondary qualities 
was related to the dimension of complexity, it emphasized another aspect 
of our experience-the ability or power of the stimulus to produce expe­
riences. A primary quality of a stimulus, he argued, always directly and 
unequivocally produced a particular response; it directly defined the 

1 00 
Chapter 3 
response, whether or not it was perceived. For example, the experience 
of redness was driven entirely by the primary quality of the stimulus ob­
ject. The same perceptual response was always produced by a stimulus 
having the same physical primary quality.3 A secondary quality, on the 
other hand, was a derivative of some organizational aspect of a stimulus 
object. For example, according to Locke, musical melodies are derived 
from the organization of the acoustic signal components and depended 
on the interpretive construction of the percept by the observer. 
The concept of "ideas" was Locke's precursor of faculties and included 
a wide range of different mental components. His list included percep­
tion, reflection, memory, contemplation, discerning, distinguishing, nam­
ing, and abstracting. He also distinguished three types of complex ideas, 
namely, modes, substances, and relations. 
This is but barest outline of the theory of mind that Locke ( 1 690) pro­
posed in his monumental An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, 
which had an enormous impact on subsequent philosophy and, as we 
see, equally seminal influence on psychology. As a particularly explicit 
attempt to develop a taxonomy of human mental processes, it clearly 
was the ancestor of the faculty psychologies that were soon to follow. 
3.1.2 
Christian Wolff's Faculty Psychology 
Widely recognized as the first academic psychologist, Christian Wolff 
(1679-1 754) holds a special place in the history of psychology. Virtually 
all of his predecessors has been independent scholars free of the con­
straints imposed by academic or administrative institutions. Wolff, who 
was trained as a mathematician, played a pivotal role in the debate over 
whether mental processes could be measured-he strongly championed 
the idea that they could be measured if adequately defined. Immanuel 
Kant ( 1630-1714), who championed the contrary point of view (based 
on his notion that the mind was always active), was such a prestigious 
philosopher that it was not until the nineteenth century that psycho­
physicists made the case for our ability to measure at least "simple" sen­
sory properties. 
3. It is now known that the perception of the hue of a patch of "colored" light is 
not determined solely by its component reflected wavelengths but also by the 
spatial relationships it has with other "colored" patches (Land, 1977). 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
1 01 
Wolff is celebrated principally for his classification of mental func­
tions, however. He argued that one had to be very specific about what 
one wished to measure, and this meant developing a list of the faculties 
of mind amenable to measurement. Wolff specifically suggested that the 
faculties such as attending, remembering, and perceiving existed in rela­
tive independence. Other, more complicated faculties, however, pre­
sented students of the mind with a difficulty that still bedevils modern 
psychologists-How do you tease apart the components of an intricately 
interacting system when all you can observe is their collective function? 
The need to justify measurement was father to Wolff's concept of inde­
pendent faculties: acting on a set of preconceived notions, his felt need 
for an objective approach to the nature of mind overwhelmed his obliga­
tion to meet the requirements for consistency and solid empirical 
grounding-bad science then as now. 
Wolff believed that there were many faculties, indeed as many as there 
are words to describe them.4 He went on to suggest that these supposedly 
independent faculties interacted with each other to produce the unified 
experiences, perceptions, cognitions, and other mental activities of which 
we are all aware. Indeed, he proposed a precursor of the very modern 
idea of associative memory by suggesting the conceptual mechanism of 
"redintegration," the process by which the activation of any particular 
portion of a memory stimulates the evocation of the other portions of 
that memory. Many modern cognitive theories, especially the list­
processing computer models, have incorporated similar ideas into their 
conceptualization of cognition. 
Wolff was followed by many others who premised their psychologies 
on the assumption that mental faculties existed as real components of the 
human mind. The Scottish scholars Thomas Reid ( 1710-1796), Dugald 
Stewart ( 1 753-1 828), and William Hamilton ( 1 788-1 856) also argued 
for the existence of quasi-independent mental processes, although their 
theories were purely mental and psychological and had no physiological 
postulates attached to them. The question of where in the brain these 
4. This is a harbinger of troubles to come. How can any taxonomy be accepted 
that simply names the faculties but does not show how they are related to each 
other? Yet this unlimited ability to name new psychological entities still bedevils 
the entire localization effort as well as psychology in general. 

1 02 
Chapter 3 
mental faculties were located would not arise until later. Nevertheless, 
the sensory modalities as well as such "higher" faculties as friendship, at­
tention, and ambition were considered by these philosophers as inde­
pendent mental modules that might someday be independently assayed. 
3.1.3 
The Phrenological Taxonomy: The Brain, the Skull, and the 
Faculties 
Franz Joseph Gall ( 1 758-1 828), trained as an anatomist, lives on as one 
of the most notorious, proto-psychologists of the last three centuries. 
Joined in a peculiar relationship with another contemporary anatomist­
Johann Spurzheim ( 1776-1 832)-Gall produced what was initially one 
of the most influential theories of mental faculties proposed up to that 
time. It lasted only long enough to become one of the most thoroughly 
discredited theories in the history of physiological psychology. Spurz­
heim, in particular, championed the theory that ( 1 )  the mind was made 
up of a number of separable mental components; (2) these components 
were localized in particular regions of the brain; and (3) finally and most 
destructively to their proposed psychology, these brain regions were as­
sociated with particular topographic features on the surface of the skull. 
The theory implied that, by palpating the bumps on the skull to deter­
mine their size and position, one could work back to estimates of person­
ality and mental ability. 
Thus a radically new emphasis-craniology and brain localization­
was added to the preexisting tradition of mind as a system of numerous 
independent (separable) component faculties. The idea of separable com­
ponents of mind went back at least to Wolff and the Scottish school of 
thought-both Reid and Stewart had long lists of psychological faculties 
much like those later proposed by Gall and Spurzheim-but probably 
had analogs in almost any historical school of psychological thought one 
might choose to examine. 
Although there is considerable controversy whether either Gall or 
Spurzheim was directly influenced by Wolff or the Scottish philosophers 
(see, for example, Klein, 1970, p. 671 ), there is no question that the same 
concept of distinctive mental modules runs through all these systems of 
psychological thinking. It is important to appreciate that, however out­
dated the phrenologists' list may be, it certainly was not revolutionary 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
1 03 
nor antagonistic to the ideas prevailing at Gall and Spurzheim's time. It 
was their emphasis on brain and, particularly, on skull localization that 
added a novel element to the modularity point of view. What is surpris­
ing is how wrong they could be about something as fundamental as the 
relation of the brain's contours to those of the skull despite their profes­
sional backgrounds (both Gall and Spurzheim were neuroanatomists). 
As anatomists, they certainly should have known that brain bumps sim­
ply do not transfer to skull bumps. 
Most psychologists at work today laugh at the "bumps on the skull" 
idea that Gall and Spurzheim ( 1 808) offered as the main tenet of phre­
nology or, as it was sometimes called, "craniology." This evolutionary 
outgrowth of the preexisting faculty psychology tradition seems, at first, 
a distant and antique idea that should best be classified among the 
charlatanisms of the nineteenth century. However, there are two things 
that suggest that such an offhand rejection of their teaching is not in or­
der. First, few psychologists today appreciate the enormous popularity of 
the movement. At its time, phrenology was ranked with Darwin's theo­
ries, at least in the popular mind. Although many scientists of the time 
severely criticized it, they provided at least a modicum of scientific re­
spectability to phrenology. We must acknowledge Gall and Spurzheim's 
proposal of one of the first specific theories of brain localization. Right 
or wrong (and they were certainly wrong with regard to almost every 
technical issue), they did associate particular brain (and to their eventual 
and ultimate ridicule, skull) regions to a very specific set of psychological 
properties or, as they had come to be known by that time-"faculties." 
Although one may challenge this fundamental assumption (as I do in this 
book), this idea still has a wide, if cryptic and implicit, acceptance in 
modern cognitive neuroscience. 
What were the phrenological faculties? In the table of contents of his 
well-remembered, but thoroughly reviled book Outlines of Phrenology, 
Spurzheim ( 1 832) provides a very crisp taxonomic outline of the psycho­
logical faculties that he and Gall had developed. Indeed, it is a taxonomy 
with categories of order and genus that reflect the great biological taxon­
omy of Linnaeus. I abstract it here as another example of the many dif­
ferent ways in which the putative modules of mind have been 
categorized. 

1 04 
Chapter 3 
Special Faculties of the Mind 
Order I 
Feelings or Affective Faculties 
Genus I 
Propensities 
Desire to live 
Alimentiveness 
1 .  Destructiveness 
2. Amativeness 
3. Philoprogenitiveness 
4. Adhesiveness 
5. Inhabitiveness 
6. Combativeness 
7. Secretiveness 
8. Acquisitiveness 
9. Constructiveness 
Genus II Sentiments 
10. Cautiousness 
1 1 .  Approbativeness 
12. Self-esteem 
13. Benevolence 
14. Reverence 
15. Firmness 
16. Conscientiousness 
1 7. Hope 
1 8. Marvellousness 
19. Ideality 
20. Mirthfulness 
21. Imitation 
Order II 
Intellectual Faculties 
Genus I External Senses 
Voluntary motion 
Feeling 
Taste 
Smell 
Hearing 
Sight 
Genus II Perceptive Faculties 
22. Individuality 
23. Configuration 
24. Size 
25. Weight and resistance 
26. Coloring 
27. Locality 
28. Order 
29. Calculation 
30. Eventuality 
3 1 .  Time 
32. Tune 
33. Artificial language 
Genus III Reflective Faculties 
34. Comparison 
35. Casualty 
True to the depth of his commitment to Gall and to the phrenology 
movement, Spurzheim went on to make quite explicit his feelings that 
this was an earthshaking enterprise. In addition to pointing out its im­
portance to morality and religion, he went on to argue in the Table of 
Contents that 
• phrenology is the true philosophy; 
• phrenology is indispensable to the study of insanity; 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
105 
• phrenology guides our judgment in social intercourse; and 
• phrenology is the basis of education. 
Despite this ostentatious puffery, the most persistent vestige of the 
phrenological theory is the diagram of the head on which these mental 
properties were mapped (figure 3.1). Modern systems of mental compo­
nents make the phrenological terms and associated skull regions seem 
archaic and somewhat ridiculous. Nevertheless, one can still find replicas 
of this drawing in curiosity shops around the world. Unfortunately, 
it remains one of the most familiar icons of psychology to the general 
public. 
Davies ( 1 955) has written an elegant history of the phrenology move­
ment, emphasizing its shortcomings, but also its profound impact on 
American thinking in particular. Davies points out that both Edgar Allan 
Poe ( 1 809-1 849) and Walt Whitman ( 1 8 1 9-1 892) were vigorous sup­
porters of phrenology and their writing reflected many of the ideas about 
which Gall and Spurzheim had written in their technical works. There 
were also several publishers totally dedicated to publishing books on the 
topic and serials such as the American Phrenological Journal were 
widely read by many segments of society. 
On the other hand, acceptance of phrenology was certainly not univer­
sal. Davies ( 1955) quotes an 1 8 1 5  evaluation of Gall and Spurzheim's 
Phrenology by the Edinburgh Review, (p. 268), a prestigious scientific 
journal of the time: "Such is the trash, the despicable trumpery, which 
two men, calling themselves scientific enquirers, have the impudence 
gravely to present to the physiologists of the 19th century, as specimens 
of reasoning and induction." 
Today no professional scientist takes either phrenology's list of facul­
ties or its anatomical associations seriously. Indeed, it was the list and 
anatomical associations that led to the downfall of Gall and Spurzheim's 
system and the loss of what they might have offered to our current 
understanding of the relationship between the brain and mental pro­
cesses. Nevertheless, one does not have to dig too deeply into modern 
cognitive psychology to find concepts that differ little from those of these 
two outcasts. 
Other critics with distinguished scientific reputations during that time 
also joined the fray. French physician Pierre Flourens ( 1 794-1 867), an 

106 
Chapter 3 
Figure 3.1 
Gall and Spurzheim's "Phrenological Head" (ca. 1 832). Still available in curios­
ity shops everywhere. 
important and highly regarded experimenter whose main technique was 
to surgically remove portions from the brains of a number of different 
animals, concluded from his studies that the brain was much more inte­
grated than the phrenologists had proposed and that psychological func­
tions were broadly represented throughout the cerebral cortexes. The 
animals that Flourens operated on appeared to gradually lose their be­
havioral repertoire, and no location seemed to be associated with any of 
the mental faculties that the phrenologists had suggested. Flourens thus 
assumed that there was, at the very least, a close interaction between the 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
107 
local areas of the brain, to the extent that no area was associated exclu­
sively with any mental process and, more, that mind was a distributed 
process of the brain. 
Flourens was not just a scientific antagonist of phrenology; he wanted 
to ridicule and defame its proponents, to extirpate phrenology from the 
body of science as effectively as he removed a portion of the brain. For 
example: 
Nothing is known of the intimate structure of the brain, and yet people are bold 
enough to trace upon it their circumscriptions, their circles, their boundaries. The 
external surface of the skull does not represent the brain's remarks, yet the same 
M. Vimont [a phrenological contemporary of Spurzheim] inscribes the following 
twenty-nine names on the skull of a goose! (Flourens, 1846, p. 92) 
Far more important, Flourens presented what was considered to be 
the most effective scientific refutation of phrenology at his time. His 
empirical arguments had much more impact than did any speculative 
philosophical counterattacks. Indeed, so effective was his criticism that 
it inhibited thinking about brain localization for many years. Even 
though Flourens was correct in putting an end to the phrenological 
nonsense, he effectively delayed our understanding of the actual organi­
zation of the brain. It was not until the 1860s and 1870s Fritsch and 
Hitzig ( 1 870), Broca ( 1 861), Ferrier ( 1 875), Wernicke ( 1 874), and 
not until the 1950s that Penfield and his colleagues (Penfield & Jas­
per, 1 954; Penfield & Roberts, 1959), restored the concept of a non­
homogeneous brain, and the prevailing modern view of brain organi­
zation reemerged. Nevertheless, the whole localization exercise might 
have been more carefully thought through and some of the nonsense 
might well have been avoided if cognitive neuroscience had heeded 
Flourens's view rather than succumbing to the forces driving the subdivi­
sion of mind into modules. Unfortunately, the localization research pro­
gram was from the outset controlled by so many compellingly simple 
assumptions that, nonsense and all, it was very likely an inevitable step 
in the evolution of modern physiological psychology and its descendents. 
That it is now time to go on to the next step is one of the messages this 
book. 
Thus, for all of phrenology'S ridiculous correlations between 
mind, brain, and skull, three of its working assumptions persist to this 

1 08 
Chapter 3 
day. If we peel off the craniology from Gall and Spurzheim's phrenol­
ogy and concentrate on their notions of physiological and psycho­
logical specificity (however incorrect in detail), we can still discern 
the persisting influence of some of their key ideas or, perhaps, the 
parallel evolution of them. Specifically, the phrenologists were operat­
ing under one major and two corollary assumptions. The major assump­
tion is one with which few scientists now disagree-the mind is a func­
tion of the brain. In a world of theological dualisms, this was a 
critically important, if not a completely original, assertion. In fact, 
Davies ( 1 955) tells us, that the Austrian government of the time for­
bade Gall to lecture about phrenology just because of its theological 
implications. 
The two persisting corollary assumptions, once again stripped of their 
phrenological particulars, are 
1. the mind is made up of a number of independent mental processes or 
faculties; and 
2. each of these processes is controlled or embodied in a particular re­
gion of the brain. 
When examined in abstracto, as I have done here, phrenology seems 
not quite so absurd or alien to our times as when it is clothed in its spe­
cific conceptual failings, mental absurdities, and anatomical errors. Even 
Flourens was willing to give Gall (if not Spurzheim) credit for his other 
neuroanatomical accomplishments: 
Gall . . .  was a great anatomist. His idea of tracing the fibers of the brain is, as to 
the anatomy of that organ, the fundamental idea. The idea is not his own: two 
French anatomists, Vieussens and Pourfour du Petit, had admirably understood 
it long before his time; but at the period of his appearance it had been long for­
gotten . . . .  It was a great merit in Gall to have recalled the true method of dissect­
ing the brain. (Flourens 1846, p. 128) 
(For more complete histories of phrenology, see the excellent and 
thoughtful analyses by Boring, 1929/1 950, Klein, 1970; and Davies, 
1955, among others.) For the moment, it is clear that, although the 
"bumps on the skull" idea is no longer with us, the idea that mental 
components exist and that they can be assigned to specific locations of 
the brain very much is. Indeed, the central problem facing cognitive neu­
roscience is how to deal with the unproven assumption that mental pro-
[s a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
1 09 
cesses are as accessible, separable, and localizable as are the material 
aspects of the brain. Among the questions that must be asked concerning 
this assumption are the following: 
1. Is modern cognitive neuroscience, in its search for the brain locations 
of mental processes, in some cryptic manner, a resurrection of some of 
the phrenological ideas (minus the absurd craniology) that properly were 
rejected long ago? 
2. Do modern scientific psychological findings support the concept of 
isola table mental components? 
3. Do modern scientific anatomical and physiological findings support 
the specialization of various regions of the brain? 
4. Will modern brain localization studies founder on the same intellec­
tual reef that phrenology did-unjustified assignment of question­
able psychological components or modules to particular regions of the 
brain? 
3.1.4 Kleist's Map 
In one of the modern manifestations of phrenological thinking, Kleist 
( 1 934) drew the map of brain functions shown in figure 3.2. The century 
of scientific knowledge that had accumulated between the work of Gall 
and Spurzheim and his own made the particular psychological processes 
listed on Kleist's chart different from those of his predecessors. Many of 
the locales shown in Kleist's map reflect new knowledge about the sen­
sory and motor aspects of the brain. Nevertheless, there is still more than 
just a vestige of the old phrenological categories exhibited here. We see 
such notable faculties as "mood" and "constructive action" as well as 
specific locations for much more modern ideas such as "visual atten­
tion. "  Clearly, the idea that particular brain regions are the locales of 
highly specific mental processes was still at work in the 1 930s and, as we 
shall see later in this chapter, continue to be important into the twenty­
first century. 
It is interesting to note, however, Kleist's map was probably well out 
of the mainstream of psychological thinking at the time. When this 
diagram was published, behaviorism was at the peak of its influence. 
Kleist, however, was a neurologist, and the vested financial and theoreti­
cal interests of these surgeons of the brain largely depended, then as 
now, on the assumption that mental processes can be localized in 

1 1 0  
Chapter 3 
Figure 3.2 
Kleist's 1 934 diagram of the human brain depicting the regions in which the vari­
ous cognitive modules and faculties were supposed to be located. 
the brain. His map illuminates how forces extraneous to pure sci­
ence (e.g., the vested interests of neurologists) can influence scientific 
thought. 
3.1.5 Welker's Taxonomy 
Many other attempts to organize mental processes into a coherent 
scheme have been offered from time to time by psychologists and 
neuroscientists. Not all have gone on to specifically associate their cate­
gories of psychological processes with particular brain regions, but al­
most all have adopted the second corollary assumption of phrenology 
mentioned earlier-that the mind is made up of a set of independent pro­
cesses that can be individually identified and perhaps separately assayed. 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
1 1 1  
One of the most interesting was the schema presented by Welker ( 1976; 
see table 3.1). 
Welker's taxonomy is made up of a collection of processes-mental 
activities that overlap to a considerable degree. Each represents a nam­
ing and identification of some functional attribute of mental activity. As 
a neuroscientist, Welker might have been willing to associate each of 
these interpersonal mental states with a neural location, but this is 
not certain. Even so, there is in this taxonomy an implicit suggestion 
that the mental processes are not quite so independent and separable 
as was judged to be the case in many of the earlier taxonomies of mental 
activity. 
3.1.6 Fodor's Input Processes 
Fodor's thoughtful essay ( 1983) on modularity led him to a particular 
point of view concerning the categories-of-mind conundrum. Likening 
the mind to a computer, he suggested that any acceptable and plausible 
taxonomy of mental modules must be limited to what he referred to as 
the "input processes." Although his taxonomy of possible taxonomies of 
mental modules, as we saw earlier, accepts "transducers," "input sys­
tems," and "central processors" as the usually acknowledged classes of 
modules, only the input system modules have sufficient scientific stand­
ing from Fodor's point of view to be endowed with any measurable and 
verifiable form of classificatory separateness. In this regard, many of us 
believe he was correct, although we would add "output modules" as 
possible candidates for taxonomic reality. 
Each input mechanism, linked as it is to the anchor of a particular 
physical stimulus and to the specific modality sensitive to that stimulus, 
is activated by a distinctly different type of physical energy or "ade­
quate" stimulus. That we can also trace an afferent signal at least par­
tially on its course from a receptor to the central nervous system along 
physically distinguishable pathways adds direct empirical evidence of 
modularity in the form of anatomical separateness in a way that proba­
bly never can be achieved with higher-level cognitive processes. 
Furthermore, the dimensionality of each sensory modality is well 
defined. For example, vision is made up of channels or modules sensitive 

1 12 
Chapter 3 
Table 3.1 
Welker's Compilation of Mental States 
Conceptual category 
Inactive states 
Arousal processes 
Awake states 
Attentive states 
Specific reactivity processes 
Cognitive states and 
processes 
Integrative processes 
Experiential processes 
Specific concepts 
Sleeping, unawareness, unconsciousness, inatten­
tiveness 
Activation, arousal, alerting 
Awareness, consciousness, alertness, vigilance 
Alerting, attending, expectancy, scanning, focus­
ing, detection, vigilance, sensitivity, orientation 
Mobilization, threshold, set, preference, aver­
sion, differentiation, image, expectancy, fixed ac­
tion pattern, scanning, focusing, attitude, percep­
tion detection, hallucination, goal orientation, 
sensitivity, excitation, orientation, hallucination, 
goal orientation, sensitvity, excitation, orienta­
tion, discrimination, tendency, illusion, displace­
ment, identification 
Perception, thinking, planning, purpose, judg­
ment, guessing, trying, will, wish, hypothesis, 
evaluation, imitation, cognitive content, expec­
tancy, set, decision, insight, optimizing, compe­
tence, self actualizing, recognition, reasoning, 
understanding, concept formation, abstraction, 
symbol formation, cognitive map, cognitive 
model, ideation, aim, creativity, innovation, voli­
tion, plasticity, confidence, certainty, effectance, 
choice, purpose, assumption, conception, goal 
orientation, seeking 
Generalization, consolidation, judgment, intro­
spection, deduction, homeostasis, programming, 
mediation, repression, inhibition, facilitation, in­
sight, fixation, plasticity, closure, abstraction, as­
similation, feedback, planning, ideation, learn­
ing, transaction, creativity, conditioning, symbol 
formation, association, integration, summation, 
irradiation, reafference, displacement, incuba­
tion, regulation 
Perception, detection, insight, confidence, intro­
spection, perception, discrimination, surprise, 
confusion, competence, knowing, symbolizing, 
feeling, empathy, knowing 
Table 3.1 
(continued) 
Conceptual category 
Motivational processes 
Affective states 
Learning processes 
Reinforcement 
processes 
Other change-type 
processes and states 
Fixation states and 
processes 
Memory processes 
Ability states 
Maturational processes 
and states 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
1 13 
Specific concepts 
Energy, attitude, compulsion, interest, homeosta­
sis, optimizing, thirst, love, aspiration, hope, per­
severance, craving, disposition, appetite, prefer­
ence, aversion, fear, hate, joy, will, wish, drive, 
need, habit strength, volition, urge, curiosity, 
hunger, anger, anxiety, value 
Tension, boredom, sensitivity, joy, emotion, anxi­
ety, conflict, surprise, satiation, anxiety, love, 
preference, aversion, impact, desire, passion, 
amusement, sentiment, longing 
Discrimination, familiarization, symbolization, 
consolidation, incubation, learning, insight, fixa­
tion, abstraction, imprinting, conditioning, gen­
eralization, deduction 
Impact, meaning, significance, reward, reinstate­
ment, reinforcement, inhibition, suppression, re­
pression, trace, engram, facilitation, closure, 
feedback 
Adaptation, adaptation level, satiation, suppres­
sion, feedback, forgetting, creativity, innovation, 
plasticity, inhibition, recovery, displacement, ha­
bituation, dishabituation, accommodation, 
disinhibition 
Persistence, fixation, instinct, habit, generaliza­
tion, fixed action pattern, stereotypy, consistency 
Memory (immediate, delayed), recall, habit, rec­
ognition, amnesia, forgetting, retention, trace, 
engram, storage, retrieval 
Discrimination, learning set, perception, achieve­
ment, adaptability, habit, acuity, capability, 
capacity 
Critical period, growth, differentiation, readi­
ness, histogenesis, neurogenesis, regionalization, 
induction, morphogenesis, pattern formation, or­
ganization 
Source: Welker, 1 976, adapted with the permission of Lawrence Erlbaum Asso­
ciates, Inc. 

1 1 4 
Chapter 3 
to color, brightness, edges, and so on. These attributes or dimensions are 
not hypothetical constructs inferred from behavior; rather, they are em­
pirical observations measured with the units of the physical world.s Both 
the complex integrative role and the symbolic interpretive roles played 
by higher-level psychological processes suggest that physical anchors (in­
cluding isomorphic codes) are lost at that stage of information process­
ing, the direct physiological evidence is elusive, and, worst of all, the 
anchors cannot meet the standards of an observational science. Because a 
thought may be triggered by a spoken word, by a visual image, or even 
by a very abstract symbol, we can establish neither its links to the physi­
cal representation nor its anatomical locus. 
Fodor subsequently asserted that although the concept of a taxonomy 
of central processes or modules is deeply ingrained in psychological 
theory, it leaves the list open to too many other kinds of ill-defined 
central activities. Closure could never be achieved with such a system. 
This is another way of making the same point made by Skinner ( 1 963, 
p. 957)-"A final objection is that the way stations [central cognitive 
components 1 are so often simply invented." It is also another expression 
of the conjecture offered by automata theorists (specifically, Moore, 
1956) that because the number of alternative internal mechanisms is 
infinite, no sequence of experiments can rule them out when one is 
studying a "black" box such as the mind-brain system. 
Fodor ( 1983) then offered a series of arguments that support the con­
cept that, at the very least, input systems can be considered modular: 
1 .  Input systems are each defined by a separate sensory modality; 
2. Our awareness of sensory messages is obligatory. Although we can 
choose to close our eyes and not see, or not to listen, we cannot choose 
not to identify a visual or oral signal once we perceive it. 
3. We are able to perceive only the output of input systems and have no 
knowledge of the codes or interpretive processes that led to a particular 
perception; 
5. It is not generally appreciated that there is no way to go from psychophysical 
observations to the exact neural or chemical mechanisms that may be involved in 
some sensory process. Psychophysical data and molar behavior are neutral with 
regard to the underlying mechanisms. Nowhere is this better illustrated than in 
the controversy between the Young-Helmholtz trichromatic and the Hering op­
ponent color theories of the nature of the color receptors. 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
1 1 5  
4 .  Their speed precludes processing analyses; 
5. They are relatively impermeable to cognitive (top-down) influences, 
that is, it is almost always impossible to override the immediate percep­
tual outcome of an input system-we always "see" the Poggendorf illu­
sion no matter how well we know it is an illusion; 
6. The output of an input system is "close" to the stimulus; 
7. Input systems, much more closely and obviously than the central pro­
cesses, are clearly associated with particular receptors, neural structures, 
and regions of the brain; 
8. When they break down, input systems produce highly specific behav­
ioral distortions; and finally, 
9. The ontogeny of the input systems seems to be very similar from one 
person to another. 
Fodor concluded not only that the input processes (which would be 
classified as "vertical" in his taxonomy of taxonomies) can and indeed 
must be studied from a modular point of view, but that most central pro­
cesses cannot be. He wrote further, but without great detail or evidence, 
of the distributed and nonlocal properties of these central processes and 
thus of the difficulty of identifying "modules" with such a great degree of 
overlap and interaction. 
Fodor ( 1983, p. 128) further supported the arguments that, for some­
thing to be considered a module, the underlying entities should "behave 
in isolation, in something like the way that they behave in situ." Unfortu­
nately, the assumption that modules so behave is ubiquitous throughout 
cognitive psychology, even though it is probably totally incorrect 
(Pachella, 1 974). 
It is clear the Fodor saw the quasi-independent mental components or 
modules of many psychobiologists as being strikingly close to what oth­
ers have called mental "faculties." Although these and other scientists 
may think that the leap from sensory input modules to modular cogni­
tive faculties is ʑot great, Fodor's arguments against central mental mod­
ularity speak to the contrary. And I, for one, think he is correct. 
3.1.7 Chomsky's Linguistic Module 
One of the most active psychological theoreticians of mind is the linguist 
Chomsky, whose studies led him to suggest that language development 
and acquisition were controlled by a particular mechanism, a module, or 

1 1 6 
Chapter 3 
a component of mind separable and distinct from other components. 
Chomsky's ideas have been widely considered not only in linguistics but 
also in psychology and can be identified as another argument against the 
thesis that mind is holistic in nature but rather, governed by the proper­
ties of separable traits or abilities. Thus Chomsky joins others who inter­
pret the mind to be made up of quasi-independent psychological organs 
or, in an older terminology, "faculties." As he puts in it an oft-quoted 
paragraph (Chomsky, 1980, p. 3): 
We may usefully think of the language faculty, the number faculty, and other 
"mental organs," as analogous to the heart or the visual system or the system of 
motor coordination and planning . . . .  In short, there seems little reason to insist 
that the brain is unique in the biological world, in that it is unstructured and 
undifferentiated, developing on the basis of uniform principles of growth or 
learning-say those of some learning theory, or of some yet-to-be-conceived gen­
eral-purpose learning strategy that are common to all domains. 
Unfortunately, to the best of my knowledge, Chomsky did not develop 
any taxonomy of "organs of mind" other than the one underlying 
speech-his particular research interest. It would have been fascinating 
to have seen how he transcribed these ideas to other psychological func­
tions and domains. 
Although one can easily agree with Chomsky that the brain is not ho­
mogeneous and that learning cannot be an universal explanation of the 
varieties of human speech, his extrapolation to the idea that all mental 
processes are equally modular is unsupported and remains one of the 
great unresolved issues in psychology. 
3.1.8 The Cognitive "Faculties" 
As we can see from our brief review thus far, a persistent premise of psy­
chology, from its inception, has been that mental processes are separable 
components that can be assayed independently and analyzed. Psycholo­
gists such as Donders ( 186811969) and S. Sternberg ( 1 969a) have used 
methods to identify such modular components as "decision time" or "re­
sponse selection time" or to distinguish between serial and parallel pro­
cessing. Their findings and interpretations represent one body of 
evidence that has been used to resolve the debate between what has been 
characterized as the "unity of mind versus faculty" controversy. 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
1 1 7  
Even accepting the utility and convenience, if not the necessity, of hav­
ing some kind of systematic dissection of the mind into components for 
research purposes, the issue still remains-Are these hypothetical com­
ponents real or simply a convenient means of emphasizing how we are 
organizing our experiments? Modern cognitive psychologists usually 
finesse or ignore this important question. By so doing, they all too pas­
sively accept the twin assumptions of analyzability of mind and the in­
trinsic isolability of mental modules. 
Another historical example of the ubiquity of the modular mind ap­
proach can be found in our pedagogic literature. Psychology textbooks 
have for some years used modularity as their main organizing theme. 
Whether such an implied taxonomy is psychobiological reality or just a 
useful teaching aid is at the crux of the issue with which this present 
book deals. One of the earliest modern texts of psychology, that of Bain 
( 1 859) is organized in terms of an extensive listing of putative psycholog­
ical processes generally categorized as either components of emotion or 
volitional will. 
This theme, if not the exact components, continues to this day. If we 
examine the contents of the first (and perhaps definitive) modern cogni­
tive text (Neisser, 1967), we see what is clearly a modern taxonomy of 
psychological processes and modules. Neisser includes the following cat­
egories of cognitive processes as the topics for the chapters in his book: 
• Iconic storage and verbal coding; 
• Pattern recognition; 
• Focal attention and figural synthesis; 
• Words as visual patterns; 
• Visual memory; 
• Speech perception; 
• Echoic memory and auditory perception; 
Active verbal memory; 
• Sentences; 
• Memory and thought. 
Twenty-seven years later, Matlin ( 1 994) tabulated the content matter 
of cognitive psychology as follows: 

1 1 8  
Chapter 3 
• Perceptual processes; 
• Models of memory; 
• Sensory memory and short-term memory; 
• Long-term memory; 
• Imagery; 
• General knowledge; 
• Language comprehension: listening and reading; 
• Language production: speaking, writing, and bilingualism; 
• Problem solving and creativity logical reasoning and decision making; 
Cognitive development. 
The problem is that what may originally have been a pedagogic tool 
has become reified as a taxonomy of actual mental process for which a 
specific locus can reasonably be sought in the brain. 
3.1.9 Shallice's Mental Structure 
Another contemporary proponent of modularity is Shallice ( 1 988). Ar­
guing from the database of neuropsychology-the study of the behav­
ioral effects of brain lesions in human patients-he suggested that there 
is a system of mental components that are independent of each other 
and, even beyond that independence, are essentially blind and deaf to 
each other's presence. Shallice's model of mental structure is one of the 
few explicit attempts in recent years to develop such a taxonomy and he 
is an articulate champion of the modular approach. (Later in this chap­
ter, I will consider some of the arguments he presented for his concept of 
mental structure.) 
For the moment, it is important to appreciate that Shallice's 
neuropsychology-based model is incomplete: it was based on surveys of 
the behavioral consequences of fortuitous damage to particular regions 
of the brain. Nevertheless, despite the limits and constraints under which 
his taxonomy was created, Shallice's work represents an important effort 
to create a taxonomy of mental processes or "faculties." 
A sampling of the categories of mental activities identified by Shall ice 
(1988) as a result of human neuropsychological studies includes 
1 .  peripheral dyslexias; 
2. central dyslexias; 
3. agraphias; 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
1 1 9  
4. phonological alexias; 
5. language operations (aphasias); 
6. amnesia (semantic memory); 
7. amnesia (episodic memory); 
8. attention disorders; 
9. neglect dyslexia; 
10. problem-solving disorders; 
1 1 .  supervision failures; 
12. sensory disorders; 
13. akinesia; 
14. anosognosla; 
15. contention scheduling; 
16. prospopagnoSla. 
Each of these neuropsychological deficits defines a particular psycho­
logical entity according to Shallice. Amnesia, for example, is the absence 
of memory of one kind or another; memory, in this case, is the mental 
component or faculty of "interest." Although some of the processes these 
deficits identify are familiar and some arcane, this list of mental capabili­
ties represented to Shallice an ensemble of relatively separable mental 
modules, faculties, or components whose function can be reduced by 
brain injuries to specific portions of the brain. 
Shallice was explicit in asserting that the sources of these defective 
mental processes are isolable and that this set of mental categories is 
based on localized lesions, but the interpretation of the significance of 
human neuropsychological findings is subject to some very important 
criticisms. Many of these criticisms were spelled out by Shallice, to his 
credit, as we shall see when I return to consider some of the problems he 
identified when mental structures are inferred from this kind of data. 
3.1.10 Intelligence and the Factor Analysis Approach 
The analysis of mental activity into components reached what many con­
sider to be its apex with the development of the powerful mathematical 
tool called "factor analysis" by workers such as Spearman ( 1904), 
Holzinger and Harman ( 1 94 1 ), and Thurstone ( 1 931, 1 947). Each of 
these psychologists had their repertoire of research tools broadened by 
their unusual (for psychologists) mathematical training. The main idea 

120 
Chapter 3 
behind the factor analysis approach is to carry out a series of "ability" 
tests and then to develop a matrix of the correlations that exist between 
all pairwise combinations of these tests. Correlations among the various 
tests are supposed to indicate the presence of common mental abilities 
that account for their common scores. The correlation matrix is then 
transformed to reduce the variance among these correlations into a much 
smaller set of "factors" that presumably map onto the underlying mental 
abilities. 
In other words, the complex set of relations represented in the correla­
tion matrix is condensed into a small number of principal axes or com­
ponents that represent what are assumed to be "multiple" or "primary" 
factors or components of the underlying mental system. This is accom­
plished by any one of several methods developed since Spearman's origi­
nal procedure was introduced. (For technical details on how to carry out 
a factor analysis, see any one of extensive library of texts now available 
on the subject.) 
Although there are many special problems associated with the applica­
tion of factor analysis to intelligence testing and the study of individual 
differences that I do not consider in detail here, the method represents a 
persistent and popular theme of psychological research. Like many of the 
other taxonomies discussed, the factor analysis approach also seeks to 
uncover a set of real mental components. Perhaps better than any other, 
however, it represents a rigorous and formal method for suggesting what 
these mental components might be. Whatever mathematical peculiarities 
may exist that may mitigate the reality of these suggested modules or fac­
tors, such a formal approach still is to be preferred to armchair infer­
ences in the same way that computational models are to be preferred 
over purely ad hoc verbal hypotheses. In making this assertion, however, 
it is also important to remember that, however powerful the mathemat­
ics, it is still fundamentally neutral: many plausible alternatives can, in 
principle, be inferred from the same set of data. 
Over the years there has been considerable contention over factor 
analysis methods. Although I shall not consider the details of the contro­
versy surrounding this approach to the discovery of mental components 
or abilities, others have pointed out some of the reasons that different 
data sets are factored in different ways to produce different theories of 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
1 2 1  
mental components. For example, R. ]. Sternberg ( 1977, pp. 23-24) dis­
cusses some of the factors bearing on these theoretical disagreements: 
1. The method of factor analysis used; 
2. The model on which the method is based; specifically, the difference 
between a component model, which cannot distinguish between specific 
factors and common factors, versus factor model, which does permit dis­
tinctions between specific and common factors; 
3. The criterion level at which a factor analysis is stopped; 
4. The sample of mental tests included in the factor analysis; 
5. The subject population sampled; 
6. The interpretation of the mathematical data; 
7. The criteria and methods used to determine the rotation of the data 
matrix (the "major source of differences among theories" according to 
Sternberg). 
Indeed, statisticians were among the initial critics who agreed with 
Sternberg on the importance of factor 7. They argued that a matrix of 
correlations could be rotated in so many different ways that it would al­
ways be possible to find some emergent factors that supported one's pre­
existing assumptions. This criticism of arbitrariness has been partially 
countered in recent years by new methods and techniques that make the 
method more dependent on the actual data obtained from the ensemble 
of ability tests. However, many other criticisms of the factor analysis 
method as an entree into the complexities of the human mind continue to 
be salient. 
In addition to the danger of creating hypothetical constructs that do 
not exist, there is also the danger of ignoring components that might ac­
tually be present. Some critics have pointed out that it is not possible al­
ways to find a factor that can account for the variance in any given set of 
data. Thus the method has also been criticized for being insensitive to the 
existence of what otherwise would have to be assumed to be "real" psy­
chological modules or components. 
Mathematical and statistical esoterica aside, there is one general point 
we must keep in mind-the logical leap from the mathematical elicita­
tion of the factors to the assumption that these factors actually represent 
biologically and psychologically significant aspects of the underlying 
mental activity is a theoretical and interpretive leap, not an empirical 

122 
Chapter 3 
one, no matter how strong the factor seems to be nor how powerful or 
rigorous the mathematical method. Indeed, it is the illusion of truth that 
emerges from the formality of the method that may be its greatest defect. 
Thus the essential question in the present context is-Are these factors 
prima facie evidence of actual underlying psychological components, or 
are they just condensed descriptions of the complex of behaviors assayed 
by the tests? Given the very large number of alternative taxonomies 
identified by the various factor analysts (a step that goes beyond the 
computation of the factors by the various analysis methods), it remains 
questionable whether there is any direct link between the output of the 
analytic method and the nature of the psychobiological entities that may 
account for the test results. The most basic issues seem not to have been 
resolved. For example, there is still considerable debate in the field con­
cerning whether there is a general intelligence factor or just a collection 
of more or less independent intellectual skills and abilities. 
Factor analysis is a tool that has been used largely by students of intel­
ligence. It is curious how little contact there has been between this school 
of psychology and cognitive psychologists concerned with very much the 
same issues and components.6 Although the language of the two groups 
may differ, both are attempting to understand the architecture of human 
mentation. Perhaps what most distinguishes the two is that students of 
intelligence are more interested in measuring the differences between in­
dividuals, whereas cognitive psychologists are more interested in the sim­
ilarities and generalities that characterize human thought. 
A trivial methodological difference also tends to separate the two 
schools of research. Intelligence testers are more likely to use paper-and­
pencil tests, whereas cognitive psychologists generally prefer to use 
pooled statistical estimates of "reaction time" or "proportion correct" as 
their performance indicators. Despite their differences, however, both 
6. A conceptually similar method, often used in cognitive studies, is multidimen­
sional scaling (Torgenson, 1 958), which defines clusters of related properties in 
terms of similarities. These clusters have been invoked to suggest the existence of 
underlying sensory or perceptual components in particular. Another method with 
an identical goal (and quite similar to modern cladistic methods) attempts to de­
velop a tree structure of relationships (Jardine, Jardine, & Sibson, 1 967). Still 
other methods exist having much the same strengths and weaknesses as factor 
analysis. 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
123 
groups clearly are pursuing their primary goal of identifying the compo­
nents of whatever it is that we call "mind." 
Although the controversy about the meaning of factor analysis out­
comes continues, many taxonomies of mental abilities and faculties have 
appeared as a result of the application of this technique. In the following 
subsections, I consider only a few of the many approaches to the prob­
lem of classifying intelligence traits that have been presented over the 
years. Some of the older approaches, although not explicitly "factor ana­
lytical" in a formal mathematical sense, were important intellectual ante­
cedents of the technique as it ultimately evolved. 
Galton's Taxonomy of Mental Abilities 
Efforts to classify intelligence 
into a system of components predated the development of factor analy­
sis. Testing to determine the abilities of specific individuals has developed 
apace with experimental psychology's general models of cognitive pro­
cessing. The classic tale is that the astronomer Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel 
( 1 784-1 846) noticed discrepancies between the measurements made by 
different assistants when they were reporting stellar transits across a reti­
cle line on the eyepiece of a telescope. Bessel and others made extensive 
studies of these discrepancies and proposed that they were due, not to 
variability of the transit times, but rather to variations in the observers' 
responses-the so-called personal equation. By applying simple statisti­
cal measures such as computations of the mean value, the astronomers 
were able to compensate for these discrepancies and to produce the most 
precise measurements of stellar transit times available until modern elec­
tronic instruments became available. As Boring ( 1929/1950, p. 147) 
points out, the research underlying the personal equation corrections 
were, in effect, reaction time experiments. Psychologists such as Wundt 
and Donders almost immediately followed up on this insight with exten­
sive studies using this still-popular measure of human mental processing. 
Individual differences were also the main interest of the remarkable 
Francis Galton ( 1 822-1 9 1 1 ), one of the first to emphasize the impor­
tance of statistical measures of correlation and distributions as useful 
tools for comparing individuals and summarizing data. Indeed, long be­
fore the days of computer image processing, Galton suggested a surpris­
ingly modern superimposition technique for averaging pictures of faces 

124 
Chapter 3 
that he applied to the reconstruction of the face of Alexander the Great. 
His idea-to average the common features of a set of images depicted on 
coins to develop the real face of Alexander-is a precursor of modern 
techniques that have been used, for example, to discover that the most 
attractive faces are the most average (Langlois & Roggman, 1990). 
Galton was an avid observer of human nature, but from the point of 
view of a naturalist. Rather than restricting his data collection to the lab­
oratory, he sought out a sample of people to whom to apply various tests 
and measurements-not all of which were cognitive or intelligence­
related. He was also interested in color blindness and what we would 
now call ergonomic measurements. 
Although Galton ( 1 883) did not develop an explicit list or taxon­
omy of mental abilities in his best-known work on the "Human Fac­
ulty," he clearly felt that human mental activity was divisible into 
components: 
The living world does not consist of a repetition of similar elements, but an end­
less variety of them, that have grown, body and soul, through selective influences 
into close adaptation to their contemporaries, and to the physical circumstances 
of the localities they inhabit . . . .  
I do not, however, offer a list of them, but shall confine myself to directing at­
tention to a few heredity characteristics of a marked kind. (p. 2) 
Galton then went on to discuss such psychological variables as "En­
ergy," "Sensitivity," "Discriminability," and "Character" (contrasting 
men, who are "straightforward," and women, who are "coy and capri­
cious" (attributions offensive to our modern tastes.) Elsewhere, he spoke 
of "conscience" and "instincts-gregarious and slavish" and wrote ex­
tensively on the "faculty" of imagery. He returned again and again to the 
express derivatives of the basic idea that there are separable components 
to the human character that can be examined independently by the stu­
dent of human nature. 
Although Galton exemplified an increasingly obsolescent way of think­
ing, one unacceptable in several important respects to current thought, 
he played an important role in the history of thinking about the mind; his 
role as an ingenious inventor of statistical techniques also cannot be 
overlooked. For our purposes, however, his work illustrates yet again the 
pervasiveness of the idea of separable attributes, modules, or faculties of 
human cognition. 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
125 
Spearman and Thurstone's Factor Analysis of Mental Abilities 
In con­
sidering factor analysis, the primary issue is, of course, what is being ex­
tracted when one rotates a matrix to produce a factor. Intelligence, like 
all other psychological parameters, dimensions, or components, is 
difficult to define, and many of us fall back on Boring's operational 
definition (or something functionally and denotatively synonymous with 
it). The debate over whether there is a general factor of intelligence that 
acts as an umbrella for all of the other individual abilities (or that indeed 
supplants them) continues with great vigor even today. As we have seen, 
authors such as Chomsky ( 1 980) feel that the various mental abilities are 
very sharply demarcated and that no general intelligence factor must be 
invoked to explain language skills. 
A pioneer in applying factor analysis, Spearman ( 1 923) believed that, 
despite the apparent confusion among those who identified a host of psy­
chological components, a kind of consistency at the most fundamental 
level had persisted over the centuries. He noted that the classic and per­
sistent taxonomy included intellect, perception, memory, and imagina­
tion (p. 25). He went on to consider the "modern" additions to this brief 
list, such as planning, censorship, and selective thinking, and concluded 
that "modern psychology would appear to have added astonishingly lit­
tle to the orthodox doctrinal foundation" (p. 26). Nevertheless, by the 
time he finished his book. Spearman had developed a taxonomy of cog­
nitive processes of his own. Although he refers to them as "principles" in 
his text, it is clear that he is alluding to mental components when he says: 
All of these cognitive processes, both noegentic and anoegentic, are aggregated 
together in immense numbers, just as are the organic cells of material organisms. 
Sometimes, notwithstanding, the single units remain still easily distinguishable. 
But at other times-often even when the whole operation superficially seems 
most simple-they may be crowded together so closely that to discriminate one 
from another demands the greatest care. {p. 347j7 
It is fascinating to note the first suggestion of nonanalyzability by 
someone whose entire career had been based on the analyzability of in­
telligence (if not mind) into components. 
7. "Noegentic" and "anogentic" are neologisms suggested by Spearman (1923) 
to avoid the connotational baggage of other terms of the time. Noegentic pro­
cesses generate "new items in the field of cognition" (p. 61), whereas anoegentic 
processes depend on previously encountered concepts and experiences. 

126 
Chapter 3 
Spearman's analytic taxonomy was based on a distinction between 
qualitative (noegentic) and quantitative (anoegentic) dimensions that 
seem archaic to us nowadays. Nevertheless, it is clear that his taxonomy 
of cognitive principles is no better or worse than any other of his time, 
and it is even hard to denigrate it in the face of current taxonomies. He 
postulated the following seven basic "principles" (Spearman, 1923, 
p. 348): 
Qualitative 
Apprehensibility of experience 
Educability of relations 
Educability of correlates 
Quantitative 
General energy 
Retentivity 
Fatigue 
Connotative control 
Primordial potency 
From these principles, many other "compound" operations could be 
constructed including such entities as "integration," "accuracy," "per­
severation," and "attention." 
My point here once again, is that there has been and continues to be a 
plethora of classification systems of cognitive processes, and that none 
has stood the test of time. Furthermore, there is little reason to assume 
any of our contemporary taxonomies is likely to do so. It is difficult in­
deed to localize a process or a function in a particular part of the brain 
when that process or function is so ephemeral that it does not outlast 
even a single generation. Each of the examples presented here uses its 
own vocabulary and invokes specific mental components that usually 
differ from those in the earlier or succeeding generations. The few terms 
that persist are mainly associated either with the sensory mechanisms 
suggested by Fodor ( 1983) or with the classic triumvirate of sensory, cog­
nitive, and response processes. 
Spearman's contributions ( 1 904, 1923) were among the first to offer 
a formal method for identifying these ephemeral components-the 
technique of factor analysis. His interests, as noted, were mainly in the 
field of intelligence and, from this vantage point, he had some germane 
things to say about the analyzability of mental activity. One of the 
most prescient and curiously inconsistent (Spearman, 1923, p. 351 )  was 
that 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
127 
the procedure in testing is to apply a large group of tests together, never regard­
ing the results of one separately, but throwing all into a common pool. The 
marks obtained by the testee from such a mixture can no more be expected to in­
dicate his degree of success with any particular constituent than, say, the weigh­
ing of a pile of baggage is able to tell the weight of any particular portmanteau 
in it. 
What Spearman was suggesting was essentially a corollary of the 
"black box" (Moore, 1956) limitation on analysis. The internal contra­
diction between this quotation and the other main theme of his life's 
work-the elicitation of the "factors" underlying intelligence-is thus as 
notable as it is perplexing. 
Spearman ( 1 923, p. 351) went on to assert the existence of his pet con­
cept-a general intelligence factor: "What really is measured-and alone 
can ever be measured-by such a pooling of miscellaneous items is the 
factor (should one exist) which, amid continual diversification otherwise, 
persistently enters into them all." Is it possible that deep within this par­
ticular psychologist may beat the cryptic heart of an antireductionist and 
behaviorist? 
Carroll's Concordance of Cognitive Factors Generated by Factor Analy­
SIS 
In what certainly must be considered to be the definitive historical 
review in the field, Carroll ( 1 993) has heroically surveyed the factor 
analysis movement, summarizing the enormous complexity of the system 
of cognitive components that has emerged from the application of 
this method in modern times. Table 3.2 displays the extent to which psy­
chologists can go in creating hypothetical mental components. Carroll's 
taxonomy does not map onto any of the others we deal with in this chap­
ter; it remains as idiosyncratic as any other and thus represents, by virtue 
of its enormous size, a divergence from, rather than a convergence to­
ward, a consensus about the hypothesized components of human mental 
activity. 
Sternberg's Cognitive Components 
One of the most interesting and 
certainly most up-to-date approaches linking the intelligence and cogni­
tive psychologists movements together is to be found in the work of R. J. 
Sternberg ( 1977, 1988). In 1977, this prolific student of intelligence and 
cognition reviewed a number of "componential" theories of analogical 

Table 3.2 
Carroll's Compilation of Cognition Components 
Factor 
French, 1951, code, name 
code 
Factor name 
(no. of studies) 
GF ("fluid intelligence') factors 
I 
Induction 
1:lnduction (9) 
RL 
Logical reasoning 
D:Deduction (37) 
RG 
General reasoning 
IP 
Integrative process 
In:Integration ( 1 )  
J 
Judgment 
J:Judgment (5) 
PL 
Planning 
Pl:Planning (4) 
Gc (crystallized intelligence) factors: 
V 
Verbal knowledge 
V:Verbal comprehension (46) 
N 
Numerical facility 
N:Number (35) 
Gv (general visual perception) factors: 
S:Space (44) 
SO 
Spatial orientation 
SO:Spatial orientation (4) 
VZ 
Spatial visualization 
Vi:Visualization (16) 
CS 
Speed of closure 
GP:Gestalt perception (2) 
CF 
Flexibility of closure 
GF:Gestalt flexibility 
SS 
Spatial scanning 
LE 
Length estimation 
LE:Length estimation (4) 
CV 
Verbal closure 
P 
Perceptual speed 
P:Perceptual speed (34) 
Gv (general visual perception) factors: 
PA 
Perceptual 
PA:Perceptual alternations ( 1 )  
alternations 
IL 
Figure illusions 
FI:Figure illusions ( 1 )  
Ga ("general auditory perception ") factors: 
AU! 
Auditory integration 
AI:Auditory integration ( 1 )  
AUR 
Auditory resistance 
AR:Auditory resistance ( 1 )  
LO 
Loudness 
Lo:Loudness (1) 
PQ 
Pitch quality 
PQ:Pitch quality ( 1 )  
Gm ("general memory") 
MA 
Associative memory 
M:Associative memory (16) 
MS 
Memory span 
Sm:Span memory (2) 
MV 
Visual memory 
VM:Visual memory (4) 
MMU 
Musical memory 
MM:Musical memory (2) 
Fluency and production factors: 
FA 
Associational fluency 
FE 
Expressional fluency 
FE:Fluency of expression (3) 
FI 
Ideational fluency 
IF:Ideation fluency (4) 
FW 
Word fluency 
W:Word fluency (8) 
XU 
Flexibility of use 
XF 
Figural flexibility 
NA 
Naming speed 
Na:Naming ( 1 )  
FS 
Speed fluency 
PS:Public speaking ( 1 )  
Cattell 
1 963 ETS kit code, 
1 976 ETS kit code, 
Guilford 
universal 
name 
name 
factors 
index 
1:lnduction 
1:lnduction 
(Several) 
T5 
Rs:Syllogistic reasoning 
RL:Logical reasoning 
EMR? 
T4 
R:General reasoning 
RG:General reasoning 
CMS 
T34 
IP:Integrative process 
V:Verbal comprehension V:Verbal comprehension 
CMU 
Tl3 
N:Number facility 
N:Number facility 
NSI,MSI? 
TlO 
S:Spatial orientation 
S:Spatial orientation 
CFS 
Tl 1 
V s: Visualization 
VZ:Visualization 
CFT 
Tl4 
Cs:Speed of closure 
CS:Speed of closure 
CFU 
T3 
Cf:Flexibility of closure 
CF:Flexibility of closure 
NFT 
T2 
Sa:Spatial scanning 
SS:Spatial scanning 
CFI 
Le:Length estimation 
CV:Verbal closure 
P:Perceptual speed 
P:Perceptual speed 
(ESU,EFU) 
Tl2 
Ma:Associative memory 
MA:Associative memory MSR 
T7 
Ms:Memory span 
MS:Memory span 
MSU,MSS? 
MV:Visual memory 
FA:Associational fluency FA:Associational fluency DMR 
Fe:Expressional fluency 
FE:Expressional fluency 
DMS 
Fi:Ideational fluency 
FI:ldeational fluency 
DMU 
T6 
Fw:Word fluency 
FW:Word fluency 
DSU 
Tl5 
Xs:Semantic spontane-
XU:Flexibility of use 
DMC 
ous flexibility 
Xa:Figural adaptive 
XF:Figural flexibility 
DFT 
flexibility 

I I 
I I 
I I 
I I 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
1 3 1  
reasoning, which required one to solve D for, given A, B, and C, an anal­
ogy of the form A is to B as C is to D. Although only one small facet of 
human mental activity, analogical reasoning represents a well-structured 
arena in which to seek out possible components of mind. Sternberg 
( 1977, p. 135) suggested six cognitive processing steps. 
1 .  Encoding: Identify the attributes of each term in the problem. 
2. Inference: Discover the rule relating A to B. 
3. Mapping: Discover the rule relating C to D. 
4. Application: Generate the rule to form D. 
5. Justification: Test the validity of the rules so generated. 
6. Preparation-Response: Prepare for the solution and perform it. 
Sternberg ( 1988, p. 269) later expanded on this theoretical base to de­
velop the following, a more complete model of mental components: 
1 .  Metacomponents (higher-order control processes) 
a. Recognizing that a problem exists. 
b. Recognizing the nature of the problem. 
c. Selecting a set of performance components. 
d. Selecting a strategy incorporating the performance components. 
e. Selecting appropriate mental representations. 
f. Allocating attentional resources. 
g. Keeping place during the performance of the task. 
h. Interpreting feedback about task performance. 
2. Performance components (processes used to execute the steps in a 
task). These include the six processing component steps of Sternberg, 
1977, tabulated above. 
3. Knowledge acquisition components (learning and storing processes) 
a. Selective encoding to distinguish relevant from irrelevant information. 
b. Selective combining of relevant information to produce novel infor­
mation. 
c. Selective companng of novel, combined information to previously 
stored information. 
Sternberg ( 1988, p. 270) went on add a list of human mental capabili­
ties that are more elaborate and complex expressions of the information­
processing components just tabulated: "verbal ability, quantitative abil­
ity, inductive and deductive reasoning abilities, learning and memory 
abilities, and spatial ability." 

132 
Chapter 3 
It is interesting to note that any of Sternberg's suggested "abilities" 
and "components" might be considered to be potential candidates for a 
comprehensive taxonomy of psychological processes. Indeed, we have 
seen already how these terms or their near synonyms appear throughout 
our search for conceptual and classificatory order. Unfortunately, orderly 
cladistic coherence does not yet appear in this melange of idiosyncratic 
attempts to define psychological concepts. The students of intelligence I 
have discussed thus far have developed their own terminology for the 
"abilities," just as the cognitive experimentalists have. 
Gardner's Multiple Intelligence Hypothesis Another contemporary psy­
chologist who has also developed a specific taxonomy of mental process 
is Gardner ( 1983), who includes the following "kinds" of intelligences: 
Object-free intelligence 
Linguistic 
Musical 
Object-related intelligence 
Logical-mathematical 
Spatial 
Bodily-kinesthetic 
Person-related 
Interpersonal 
Intra personal 
To which an eighth category has been added (Gardner, 1999): 
Naturalist. 
As specific as Gardner is in classifying the various kinds of intelli­
gences, he hesitates to apply such a scheme to other aspects of human 
mentation. Indeed, his argument is that the categories in his taxonomy 
are only valuable when one is concerned with how we process objects in 
the world, and that to extend this classification system to mental processes 
such as "personality, motivation, will, attention, character, creativity, 
and other important and significant human capabilities" (Gardner, 1999, 
p. 74) may be ill advised. Again, even though it is limited to only one do­
main of psychological processes-" intelligences" -Gardner's taxonomy 
clearly provides another example of a modern "modular" system. 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
133 
3.1.11 The Emerging "Modern" Imaging Taxonomy 
Finally, there may be no better way to end this discussion of classic and 
modern taxonomies of mental components than to consider the various 
processes that have been the object of the localization quest by means of 
imaging techniques. The database of cognitive neuroscience is itself an 
implicit taxonomy of mental modules and components. The variety of 
mental activity invoked in this quest is voluminous and the following list 
is far from exhaustive, but it does give an idea of the enormous span of 
current research attention. Some of the targeted mental components are 
topics that have been of interest to psychology for many years. Many, on 
the other hand, are more recent foci of research attention. The particular 
brain areas in which these psychological processes are localized are not 
germane to the present discussion. 
In providing a very limited sample of the mental processes being inves­
tigated with PET or MRI imaging techniques, my purpose is to show that 
a new vocabulary and thus, implicitly, a new taxonomy is emerging, one 
unfortunately based on ad hoc and methodological criteria rather than 
on the logical structure required of a solid cladistic system: 
1. Kosslyn et a1. ( 1 999) have studied visual imagery. 
2. Lumer, Friston, and Rees ( 1 998) have studied the brain loci of percep­
tual rivalry. 
3. Spitzer et a1. ( 1 996) have attacked the problem of semantic informa­
tion processing. 
4. Smith and Jonides ( 1 999) have explored the role of frontal cortex in 
short-term memory storage and the executive processes that act on that 
stored information. 
5. Buchel, Coull, and Friston ( 1 999) have studied associative learning. 
6. McIntosh, Rajah, and Lobaugh ( 1 999), on the other hand, have ex­
plored sensory learning. 
7. Kopelman, Stahope, and Kingsley (1997) have dissected temporal and 
spatial context memory into different processes represented by different 
regions. 
8. Dehaene, Spelke, Pinel, Stanescu, and Tsivkin ( 1 999) have studied the 
basis of mathematical thinking, implicating both linguistic competence 
and visuospatial representations. 
9. Gulyas and Roland ( 1 994a, 1 994b) have studied binocular disparity 
detection, form, and color. 

134 
Chapter 3 
10. Roland and Gulyas (1992) have studied visual pattern discrimina­
tion and the formation of visual memories. 
1 1. Kanwisher, McDermott, and Chun (1997), among others, have des­
ignated one or another locus in the brain as a face perception area. 
12. Elfgren and Risberg (1998) have studied verbal fluency and "design" 
fluency. 
13. Petersen, Fox, Posner, Mintum, and Raichle (1988) have studied the 
brain correlates of linguistic single word processing. 
14. Blakemore, Rees, and Firth (1998) have studied the differential 
brain effects of expected and unexpected events. 
15. Kastner, De Weerd, Desimone, and Ungerleider (1998) have studied 
directed attention. 
16. Tranel, Damasio, and Damasio (1997) have sought to determine 
which brain regions are involved in the retrieval of conceptual knowl­
edge, that is, the categories of concrete objects. 
17. Barch et al. (1997) have assigned working memory and task 
difficulty to separate brain regions. 
18. Cohen et al. (1997) have also explored working memory. 
19. Smith, Jonides, Marshuetz, and Koeppe (1998) have studied verbal 
working memory. 
20. Kapur et al. (1996) have studied intentional learning of verbal mate­
rials. 
21. Lane et al. (1997) have assigned pleasant and unpleasant emotions 
to different combinations of parts of the limbic system. 
22. Ploghaus et al. (1999) have used tomographic images to distinguish 
between pain and the anticipation of pain. 
It is important to keep in mind that what we are concerned with here is 
the relationship between the mental or cognitive processes and brain re­
gions. PET, MRI, and other imaging techniques have been used for many 
useful and valuable medical, surgical, and research purposes. It is the 
questionable application of these techniques to the localization of psy­
chological functions that is the principal focus of this book's discussion. 
Nevertheless, and with specific regard to the psychobiological issue at 
hand, this list, partial and incomplete as it is, does make one strong 
point. There are a large number of more or less inadequately defined 
mental components and activities that have been associated with particu­
lar regions of the brain by PET and MRI techniques and the list is grow­
ing rapidly. I contend that the recent wave of research using imaging 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
135 
techniques has led to a proliferation of hypothetical psychological, cog­
nitive, or mental components without a proper foundation of clear-cut 
answers to the questions of accessibility and analyzability. 
Implicit in this and all other lists and taxonomies presented in this 
chapter is the central assumption of analyzability. That is, it is increas­
ingly clear that the a priori assumption that the mind can be finely di­
vided into any number of components or modules is alive and well. The 
current approach has deep intellectual roots and has been at the core of 
thinking about mental processes since philosophers and scientists began 
to consider these issues. 
Compartmentalization of mind into a set of components is a conve­
nient concept to help us organize what would otherwise have to be con­
sidered a composite and integrated as well as unified "mind." Indeed, it 
may be that it is extremely difficult to study mentation in any other way. 
Yet exactly because of this pragmatic convenience and ease, it is possible 
that we are being led astray from a truer, more valid, and more realistic 
conceptualization of the unified nature of mental processes based on 
widely distributed brain mechanisms. If our search is for truth and an ac­
tual rather than a convenient or pragmatic understanding of mind and 
brain, then it may be necessary to consider what the alternative-an indi­
visible, composite, aggregated, and unanalyzable mind-might be like. 
This is the main alternative raised by those of us who argue against the 
uncritical acceptance of mental analyzability and the cerebral localiza­
tion of high-level cognitive (i.e., nonsensory and nonmotor) processes. 
Indeed, though seemingly mute these days, there have always been critics 
who have challenged analyzability and suggested that what is being mea­
sured in different experiments are the measurable properties of a unified 
mind rather than separable entities. It is to these counterarguments, I 
now turn. 
3.2 Arguments against Mental Faculties or Components: The Properties 
versus Entities Controversy 
It is the thesis of this book that, although there is abundant evidence that 
the brain is not homogeneous, the corollary that our mental activity can 
be divided up into real (true, authentic, veridical, valid) components is 

136 
Chapter 3 
not only unproven, but may not be tenable in the light of logical analysis, 
well-defined mathematical limits, and current empirical data. 
The main alternative to the analyzability hypothesis is that the 
proposed "components" of mental activity are actually properties of 
some unified mind-rather than distinct entities. By implication, the 
modules or components of mind that have been invoked for centuries are 
simply manifestations of the procedures and methods used to measure 
behavioral functions, that is, any given mental module is a manifestation 
of just one of the infinitely many ways of measuring the complex, but 
unitary process traditionally called "mind." For example, the wide­
spread acceptance of a family of different types of memory (e.g., short­
term, working, and long-term memory) depends in large part on the 
methods used to study the retention of information. As new methods are 
developed, it is likely that other types of memory with different time 
constants are likely to emerge (see, for example, the previously unrecog­
nized intermediate memory type postulated in Ishai & Sagai, 1995). 
What this all boils down to is-Are modular inferences from behavior 
truly localizable entities or merely properties of a more general mental 
activity? 
I argue that, no matter how useful it may be or how entrenched in sci­
entific psychology, the idea of separable mental components or modules 
is deeply flawed. At the very least, the whole question should be recon­
sidered as a research issue rather than simply accepted as an a priori fun­
damental premise of our science. For example, consider the study of 
attention, a familiar and well-used concept in cognitive psychology. 
What can we conclude is its actual nature? Is it a "stuff" that can be di­
vided, allocated, and focused and that is available only in limited 
amounts, and thus can be localized in a particular part of the brain? Or, 
to the contrary, is it an attribute or characteristic of perception, measur­
able with appropriate psychophysical assay techniques, yet as insepara­
ble as the diameter or whiteness of a golf ball is from the physical ball 
itself? We tend not to think of the properties of physical objects such as 
color or diameter as "things" unto themselves, but rather as properties 
of the object. It seems plausible that many of the psychological compo­
nents or modules we seek to locate in a particular region of the brain 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
137 
should likewise be thought of as properties of a unified mental "object" 
rather than as analyzable and isola table entities. 
I propose that it is incorrect to think of attention, like many other men­
tal activities, as a separable module and, therefore, also as a potentially 
localizable entity. Attention should be thought of, not as a "stuff" or 
"thing," but rather as an interpersonally observable attribute or property 
of what is essentially unobservable intra personal mentation, namely, 
mind. By doing so, we can begin to see in their proper light metaphors 
such as the spotlight or the distributed sheet that are often posed as theo­
retical "explanations" or "models" for attention. It may be even appro­
priate to consider attention only in terms of the operations we use to 
measure it and the behavior so measured, a line of logic that would lead 
us back to a behaviorist psychology.8 
To support the idea that psychological components such as attention 
would be better considered as attributes or properties rather than enti­
ties, we have to delve deeper into the history of thinking about mental 
components, modules, or "faculties" as they have been variously referred 
to over the years. Once again, it is unlikely that the controversy between 
proponents of faculty psychology (in all of its forms-including modern 
cognitive mentalism) and proponents of a "unity of mind" approach can 
be resolved by any arguments or evidence presented by this book. Even 
more important to me than its resolution, however, is reconsideration of 
the issue, which I am convinced is a necessary prerequisite if localization 
research, using PET, fMRI, or any other technique is ever to arrive at sci­
entifically valid conclusions-or be set aside if shown to have no scien­
tific basis. 
There is, somewhat surprisingly, a substantial body of knowledge and 
evidence that speaks to the issue of entities versus properties-of a family 
of isolatable mental components versus a unitary conceptualization of 
mind. In the following subsections, consider classic and modern argu­
ments against mental components and faculties. Some of these argu­
ments are, admittedly, as weak as those they seek to refute; others are 
8. Some of my remarks on attention have been abstracted and revised from an 
earlier article (Uttal, 2000b) 

138 
Chapter 3 
more compelling. It is my hope that all will serve to raise the issue to a 
more conspicuous level of discussion. 
3.2.1 Herbart 
One of the first to challenge the early faculty psychologists' contention 
that mind was made up of separable parts was Johann Friedrich Herbart 
( 1 776-1 841). Herbart was a philosopher-psychologist whose thinking 
was closely allied to the British empiricists. Good empiricist that he was, 
he denied that there were any innate ideas or mental processes of any 
kinds; our minds developed, he suggested, under the stimulation of the 
experiences we encountered over the span of our lives. Our experiences 
were created by our sensations-or, as he called them, "presentations"­
that impinged on us from the outside world. Like the early asso­
ciationists, Herbart suggested that the complex aspects of our mental 
activity arose from concatenations and linkages of the "presentations" 
into a variety of mental activities. 
In summarizing Herbart's psychological perspective in this way, it is 
important that we keep two issues separate. The first is the issue of pri­
mary concern to us in this discussion-Are there separable and isolatable 
faculties, modules, or components of mental activity? The other issue 
that crisscrosses this discussion is the one raised by the controversy be­
tween the rationalists and empiricists-the argument between those (like 
Herbart) who believed that all mental components, separable or not, had 
to be learned by experience and those (like Descartes and Kant) who felt 
that the most fundamental ideas were innate. This controversy, the "na­
ture-nurture" issue in current parlance, although interesting and quite 
important in its own right, is not germane to the issue of primary con­
cern in this chapter. A corollary of that primary issue, of course, is-Do 
separable mental components have any reality beyond the convenience 
they offer to our experimental designs and protocols and the simplicity 
they offer to our theories? 
Herbart ( 1 809/1 891) argued strongly against the entire concept of sep­
arable mental faculties. To the contrary, he asserted, mental faculties 
were the illusory expressions of a unified and fundamental mental activ­
ity. Mind only appeared to be composed of different components when 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
139 
examined from different points of view. Herbart was not immune to 
some kind of division of mental experiences. He accepted the idea that 
the perceptual experiences we call "sounds" differed from those we call 
"sights" in some fundamental ways, but not the idea that cognitive func­
tions could be so analyzed or categorized.9 
For example, when speaking of "classifications" (which he and his 
contemporaries used as a synonym for the word "faculties" ), Herbart 
( 1 809/1 891, pp. 39, 40, 41) said: 
These classifications are mere empirical groupings without any indication of 
completeness, without any fixed, definite, and authorized division; hence, it will 
be no matter for wonder if on a closer investigation of the facts, subjects are dis­
covered which either belong in more than one of the departments already made, 
or which cannot be classified in any one of them whatever . . . .  The classifications 
made can be used only in the preliminary examination, but in no way can they be 
used as an exact description of that which takes place in man, for they separate 
that which in reality is constantly united . . . .  That the classified mental faculties 
exist not only side by side with one another, but in relation to one another, em­
pirical psychology acknowledges, in the fact that it employs them throughout in 
the elaboration of one and the same material. 
Clearly, Herbart came down solidly on the side of the "unity of 
mind" contingent. He abhorred the reification of different psychological 
components for research purposes. He very likely would have been dis­
tressed by current attempts to locate these hypothetical properties or at­
tributes in particular parts of the brain. One might also suspect that his 
evolving philosophy would ultimately have led him to the behaviorist 
camp. 
3.2.2 Thorndike 
The metaphor of mind as a system of separable and analyzable compo­
nents of mind is a compelling and convenient one. However, as we are 
seeing in these subsections, it is neither a universally accepted nor a 
necessarily valid one. Thorndike ( 1 923), for example, has repeatedly 
been cited by a number of historians for his remarks against faculty 
thinking: 
9. Once again we can see that the input or afferent processes may be made up of 
components even though the central processes do not seem to have this property. 
Fodor (see page 96) is not alone in championing this idea. 

1 40 
Chapter 3 
The mental sciences should at once rid themselves of the conception of the mind 
as a sort of machine, different parts of which sense, perceive, discriminate, imag­
ine, remember, conceive, associate, reason about, desire, choose, form habits, at­
tend to. Such a conception was adapted to the uses of writers of books on general 
method and arguments for formal discipline and barren descriptive psychologies, 
but such a mind nowhere exists. (p. 366) 
He went on to give his own, more positive characterization of mind: 
"The mind is really but the sum total of an individual's feelings and acts, 
of the connections between outside events and his responses thereto, and 
of all of the possibilities of having such feelings, acts and connections" 
(p. 366). 
The unfortunate fact is that, despite the many historical counterargu­
ments made by scholars such as Thorndike, the mental modularity issue 
still has not been adequately confronted as an issue itself, especially by 
those whose entire intellectual edifice depends so much on its resolution. 
Psychologists, regardless of what side of the argument they might be on, 
pontificate about the matter but do not typically confront it in the way 
the physical sciences deal with their important conceptual foundations. 
Perhaps, it is not possible to answer this question (mental processes may 
be truly inaccessible), but if that is the case, what credibility can be given 
to any of the complex theories that are based on an assumption of the ex­
istence of such hidden mental modules or components? 
To his everlasting credit, Thorndike (1923) suggested why psychologi­
cal "traits" appear so of ten-a suggestion that rings true over the de­
cades. He conjectured that it is a result of the logic of the situation, not 
of the reality of mental organization. His point was that it is far easier to 
show how the components are not related (and thus independent) than 
to show how they are related (and thus a part of some unified entity). In 
other words, it is easier to develop barriers and boundaries between hy­
pothetical modules, even when they do not exist, than to show that they 
are related or, even more profoundly, attributes of the same thing. He 
went further, to propose three reasons for this "logical" pressure toward 
compartmentalization: 
1 .  The items sampled were too few. Thus two items in a test might show 
a low correlation, but if a more comprehensive test were carried out, the 
correlation would be much higher. 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
141 
2. The population sampled was too diverse. Thus correlations may be 
spuriously lower than if the studied population had been more homoge­
neous. 
3. The psychological traits, modules, or components proposed were ac­
tually so complex that there was no possibility of developing a simple 
and easy representation or analysis of them. 
Thus Thorndike, in a reasoned way and using the language of statis­
tics, revisits the "slippery slope" metaphor, suggesting that it is all too 
easy to slide downhill intellectually under the pressures of what may 
seem to be needed to support a particular point of view. 
In sum, Thorndike supported a unified concept of mental activity 
sharply rather than the faculty or module concept that permeates so 
much of classic and modern psychology. It would be well for today's re­
searchers to at least consider some of Thorndike's caveats before publish­
ing papers based on experiments linking vaguely defined hypothetical 
psychological modules with brain locales, no matter how well circum­
scribed those brain regions might be. Whatever happens, it takes no gift 
of prophecy to predict with confidence that the relationship of psycho­
logical components to brain loci will turn out to be much more compli­
cated than today's imaging explorations suggest. 
3.2.3 Shallice 
As a neuropsychologist, Shallice was also highly aware of criticisms tra­
ditionally made against the modularity hypothesis. In Shallice, 1988, he 
considered arguments both for and against modularity.lo Shallice noted 
that there was great variability in the behavioral effects from one patient 
to another with very similar lesions. He also pointed out that the behav­
ioral deficits observed by the neuropsychologists did not map very well 
onto the modules emerging from the laboratories of the experimental 
psychologists. Indeed, he went on to note (p. 10) that many of the ob­
served deficits in patients reflected psychological properties that arose 
10. For a balanced and thoughtful discussion of the problems facing those who 
seek to build bridges between abnormal behavior and brain lesions, there may be 
no better source than Shallice's fine book ( 1 988). I draw on his analysis again in 
chapter 4. 

142 
Chapter 3 
not from the data, but rather from the theories of the investigator. 
Speaking of Lichtheim (1885) as the "doyen" of the "diagram makers" 
(i.e., proponents of psychological faculties or modules), Shallice ( 1988, 
p. 1 1 )  pointed out that 
his theoretical system was based on a priori notions of how children learned to 
speak. He then deduced that certain types of patients should exist, and either de­
scribed a patient of his own or referred to one in the literature. The process was 
theory driven, not data driven. 
Given our frail ability to introspect into the logic underlying our cogni­
tive processes, those researching localization would do well to give his 
remarks serious consideration. 
Nevertheless, true to his own commitment to psychological compo­
nents, Shallice went on to present a lucid discussion of what he believed 
were the four most compelling modern arguments for mental modularity, 
based, respectively, on (1) computational modeling; (2) linguistic theory; 
(3) neurophysiology and neuroanatomy; and (4) cognitive psychology. 
True, also, to his already well demonstrated evenhandedness, Shallice 
provided us with a critique of even these four arguments, pointing out 
that "they do not demonstrate that modularity is a general property of 
the system underlying human cognition. However, they do make it a rea­
sonable assumption to use as a first pass in the interpretation of 
neuropsychological findings" (p. 20). 
From my point of view, all of these four arguments raised for modular­
ity by Shallice are flawed to a greater or lesser degree. First, computa­
tional models are neutral with respect to the underlying neural or 
psychological mechanisms (Uttal, 1998): they reflect the constraints of 
the programming system they are using to build their description of the 
behavioral responses rather than the constraints imposed by the 
psychobiology of the brain-mind system. 
Second, linguistic theory is also neutral with respect to the actual 
mechanisms underlying of the behavior it seeks to explain. Drawing 
mainly on the strong modularity hypothesis proposed by Chomsky, it 
works from theoretical inferences that do little to define the true nature 
of mental components. 
Third, even Shallice ( 1988, p. 21) agrees that "neuropsychological evi­
dence does not speak definitively to the question of modularity." I would 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
143 
add further that the complexity of the neural system is so great and we 
know (and can know) so little about it that no inference drawn from 
brain injury data can be used to constrain theories of mental organiza­
tion. 
Fourth, and finally, although cognitive psychology represents the cur­
rent zeitgeist, much of its quest for the modules of mind is based on as­
sumptions of rigidity and seriality that became implausible when 
examined closely (Pachella, 1974). 
3.3 Conclusion 
In this chapter, I have reviewed many of the different components, mod­
ules, faculties, and traits that have been proposed as the elements of men­
tal activity. There are five important conclusions that can be drawn from 
this review: 
1. There never has been any agreement on what the components of men­
tal activity are. 
2. There seems to be no trend toward such an agreement. 
3. New components are added ad hoc as new methods are introduced or 
new psychological theories are developed. 
4. The creation of many new components is driven more by preexisting 
theory, ad hoc "hunches," and experimental protocols than by empirical 
findings. 
5. The one exception to conclusions 1 through 4 concerns the sensory 
and motor domains. In those domains alone, there are sufficient anchors 
to the physical world to permit researchers to make inferences that can 
be substantiated. 
Notwithstanding these conclusions, it is unarguable that the concept of 
modular faculties or components of mental activity has played and con­
tinues to play a central role in psychological thinking. There are power­
ful forces that drive us in this direction. First, the universe of mind, both 
in terms of the neural mechanics that underlie it and the interconnections 
among its attributes or properties, remains a Gordian knot of what may 
be unassailable complexity. 
Second, as a result of this complexity, it may be, in theory and in prac­
tice, impossible to do any research using conventional scientific methods 

144 
Chapter 3 
on mental activity without invoking the artifice of classifying and decom­
posing it into subdivisions.ll The modern scientific method, as we know 
it, is based on Francis Bacon's naturalistic approach to science and Des­
cartes' rigorously logical analysis-both of which strongly favored 
breaking down systems into their constituent parts and examining these 
parts in detail. Psychological instantiations of the scientific method have 
also emphasized the components-for example, micro electrode studies, 
computer models using algorithms, and traditional behavior-based psy­
chological experiments. But, what if these instantiations are flawed in 
some fundamental way? What if the postulated psychological compo­
nents are only hypothetical constructs created to "elementalize" what is 
actually a unified entity? Suppose the arguments against accessibility and 
analyzability are correct-what then? What if we have made a major 
conceptual error by misidentifying properties or attributes of integrated 
mental activity as isolatable entities? How would such a conclusion bear 
on what is being done in the imaging laboratories these days? 
The problem faced by psychologists is that the anchors for independ­
ent resolution of these questions about high-level cognitive components 
may not be available as they are for the physical units of chemistry or 
physics, for example. For one thing, the proposed components or mod­
ules of mind do not have the same independent measurability that atoms 
or protons or even quarks do. Rather, they are largely inferences that 
have little in the way of independently measurable properties outside the 
highly structured and constrained experimental designs psychologists 
typically use. 
Although it may be that it is far easier just to assume faculties and 
components than it is to search for a conclusive answer to the question of 
their existence there is one body of evidence that suggests an indirect an­
swer to this question. As I look over the studies reviewed in this chapter, 
1 1. Wimsatt ( 1974) reminds us of Simon's comment ( 1969, p. 86): "In the face 
of complexity, an in-principle reductionist may be at the same time a pragmatic 
holist." My agreement with this comment should be obvious, but I would go 
even further to suggest that the word "may" should be changed to "must." If this 
is done, Simon's concise words sum up the kind of ontological monism and 
epistemological dualism that I feel must control thinking about mental and neu­
ral modularity as well as the relationship between the brain and the mind. 
Is a Taxonomy of Cognitive Processes Possible? 
145 
one thing becomes completely clear. There is no historical trend, no evo­
lutionary sequence, no convergence toward a taxonomy of mental com­
ponents. We seem to have no community memory; the components 
suggested in one generation are largely forgotten in the next. In virtually 
every case the response to this challenge has been strictly constrained by 
the Zeitgeist of the moment. The putative components are based on idio­
syncratic and pragmatic concerns rather than on the empirical and theo­
retical criteria scientists should cherish. From the time of the Greek 
philosophers to the most modern Factor Analytical and cognitive 
neuroscientific schemes, it has been all too easy to succumb to the pres­
sure to dissect that which may not, in psychobiological fact, be separa­
ble. Statistics, convenience, and admittedly, a certain amount of utility in 
the naming and description of mental activities for the purposes of ex­
perimental design make modularity an easy way out of the problems 
generated by the enormous complexity of our mental life. 
In researching this chapter, I was not able to unearth any agreement 
nor any sign of impending agreement, on the specific nature of the many 
hypothetical mental faculties, components, or modules that have been 
proposed. The only exception to this has been the centuries old 
trichotomy of sensory-transformational-response mechanisms-the clas­
sic notion of s-o-R. 
Therefore, returning to the title question of this chapter, 
if psychology's goal is to develop a valid psychobiological taxonomy of 
mental processes, and 
. if that taxonomy is to transcend the simple utilitarian level of describ­
ing the kinds of experiments we execute, 
. then the answer to "Is a taxonomy or even a lexicon of cognitive pro­
cesses possible? "  has to be no. 
The five principal reasons for this negative conclusion, already alluded 
to in this and my earlier books, are 
1. the neutrality of formal models; 
2. the neutrality of behavioral data and findings; 
3. the inaccessibility of mental activity; 
4. the unanalyzability of mental activity; 
5. the complexity of both mental activity and its relevant neural under­
pmnmgs. 

1 46 
Chapter 3 
If there is no impending-indeed, no possible-agreement on what 
mental components are being measured or what a valid taxonomy of 
mental components should look like, what credence can be given to the 
quest to localize such phantoms? If mental components are only a se­
mantic convenience, but have neither scientific validity nor the promise 
of being scientifically validated, what can be made of the ultra precise 
maps showing sharply demarcated "hot spots" of neural activity when 
"pure" forms of these mental components are supposedly activated? Ob­
viously, much needs to be done to answer these questions and to properly 
interpret the often fascinating findings from the imaging laboratories. It 
is likely that what these findings will turn out to mean will be far differ­
ent from what we now believe they mean. 
That mental modules or components are still so vaguely defined, in­
deed, that their very existence is problematical, is the major reason that 
much of the imaging work of the last decade must be reinterpreted. But 
there are other reasons to reconsider the findings of these studies. Some 
of the reasons are rooted in the technology itself, some in the mathemati­
cal tools used to analyze the data, and some in the kind of conceptual 
misunderstandings that led to diminished interest in other noninvasive 
techniques (e.g., the EEG or EVBP) that seemed so promising in previous 
decades. Chapter 4 pursues these additional reasons for reconsidering 
what it is that we are doing when we attempt to localize mental activity 
in different parts of the brain. 
4 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
As discussed in chapter 3, beyond agreement that cognitive processes can 
be grouped into three classes-input, output, and central transforma­
tion-there has been no convergence on a more detailed taxonomy of 
these processes. Rather, a more or less expedient and highly transitory 
system of definitions has been developed in each generation as new phe­
nomena are observed or hypothetical entities created. This process of 
listing an ever-increasing number of what may well be temporary and 
convenient, but what are certainly unsubstantiated, cognitive processes is 
currently driven by the methods, theories, and approaches of a wide 
range of scientists, most notably cognitive neuroscientists. All too many 
invoke ad hoc and hypothetical mental processes, particularize the needs 
of a given experiment, or simply give a name to some observed behavior. 
For reasons already expressed, however, it remains extremely difficult to 
establish any one of these cognitive processes as a true and valid compo­
nent underlying observed behavior. Any attempt to precisely define men­
tal events or cognitive processes quickly leads to an appreciation of how 
elusive these events or processes are-and how circular the resultant 
"definitions. " 
Weaving throughout all of the difficulties of defining mental compo­
nents are two fundamental questions. The first is whether psychological 
processes can be accessed, a matter dealt with more fully in Uttal, 
2000a, where I argued that, whatever the underlying mental entities are, 
there is no valid way to access them. Neither introspective reports nor 
behavioral or neurophysiological measures can, in point of basic princi­
ple, provide a solid scientific means of specifying internal processes or 
mechanisms. 

1 48 
Chapter 4 
The second fundamental question is whether the mind (which may be 
unitary and irretrievably integrated) can be decomposed into compo­
nents, modules, or faculties. As I argued in chapter 3 and in Uttal, 1998, 
such a decomposition is at best a methodological convenience and at 
worst a seriously misleading intellectual artifice. We may be driven to ac­
cepting this pseudoanalyzability by the misapplication of traditional 
methods of scientific analysis to what may be in reality a psychobiologi­
cal unity. 
The ultimate nature of mind-whether it can be decomposed or must 
be dealt with as a unit-remains one of the most important, yet all-too­
rarely considered, conceptual conundrums in contemporary scientific 
psychology. This is particularly evident in modern cognitive mentalism, 
where the resolution of the conundrum in favor of an already assumed 
analyzability is taken for granted. However it may in fact be resolved, 
even if mind is ultimately deemed to be decomposable into components, 
there is at present still no agreement concerning what these components 
are. 
There may be no more rigorous proof of the contention that we do not 
have good definitions of mental activity than the difficulty injected into 
any conversation when the ambiguously defined term consciousness is 
introduced. There is still disagreement whether this term denotes a thing 
or a property-an entity that could be localized or a general attribute de­
scribing some aspect of an otherwise unanalyzable process. Some work­
ers (e.g., Tononi & Edelman, 1998, p. 1 847) strongly believe that 
consciousness must be the result of activity distributed throughout the 
whole brain. Others (e.g., Posner & Raichle, 199411997, pp. 178-179) 
strongly believe that representation of consciousness cum awareness cum 
"executive attention system" is localized in a specific brain region-the 
cingulate gyrus. These directly contrary opinions are held with equal 
conviction despite the absence of agreement over what exactly is to be lo­
calized-or not localized. 
In point of historical fact, the problem of consciousness has bedeviled 
not only contemporary experimental psychologists but also their intellec­
tual predecessors. Indeed, a recurrent theme in the papers collected by 
Warner and Dzubka ( 1 994) is that our theoretical knowledge of conscious­
ness is virtually nonexistent. For example, Nagel (1994, p. 63) says: 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
149 
We know that conscious mental processes occur as a part of animal life, and that 
they are intimately connected with behavior and with the physical activity of our 
nervous systems and those of other animals. But at the more general, one might 
say cosmological, level, we know essentially nothing for we do not understand 
why these particular connections exist. Our knowledge is entirely empirical and 
ad hoc, not theoretical. 
Nagel goes on to argue that one of the results of the application of the 
objective physical sciences to the study of the nature of man is that it be­
comes necessary to eschew the study of subjectivity-another term that 
has come to be used by philosophers in the place of consciousness. This 
does not mean that we cannot study and measure human behavior (in 
fact, Nagel supports some psychological approaches), but it does suggest 
that the special features of self-awareness that characterize "subjectivity" 
and "consciousness" are substantial barriers to solving the mind-body 
problem. Indeed, Nagel further notes: "We at present lack the concep­
tion of a complete analysis of subjective, phenomenological features of 
mental reality in terms of an objective, physical basis and there is no rea­
son to believe that such a thing is possible" (p. 67). 
McGinn (1994, p. 114) expresses a similar point of view: 
The mind-body problem, construed as a problem about the emergence of con­
sciousness from matter, presents deep and intractable problems of understand­
ing, manifested in the miraculous-seeming character of the psychophysical link. 
We do not possess the theoretical tools with which to make headway with the 
problem . . . .  That there should exist problems that systematically escape our best 
theoretical efforts is antecedently highly probable, and the problem of conscious­
ness looks like an instance of just such a problem. 
As one reads through other papers in Warner & Szubka, 1994, the im­
pression emerges that some psychologists invoke consciousness as a sine 
qua non for any legitimate study of mental information processing. In 
doing so, they often drive a dualistic wedge between the physical and the 
mental that violates what is to me the basic scientific assumption that all 
of the information-processing activities we collectively call "mind" are of 
the same level of reality as the biophysical mechanisms that instantiate 
them. Down that dualistic road lies theoretical disaster. The much more 
desirable alternative is to exclude the intractable such as intrapersonal 
consciousness from our studies and to concentrate on the interpersonally 
measurable aspects of our science such as behavior and physiology. To 
continuously evoke the indefinable can only impede and delay acquiring 

1 50 
Chapter 4 
whatever knowledge of ourselves that is available through scientific 
methods. 
Choosing the proper strategy, of course, requires that we distinguish 
between the intractable and the merely difficult. At this junction, there is 
obviously going to be much disagreement as to where a given problem 
should be placed on the spectrum from tractable to intractable. Some 
will judge the problem of consciousness intractable, others will deem it 
tractable but difficult, while still others, who consider introspective re­
ports to be valid data, will assume that it is fully tractable, at least in the 
long run. My personal feeling is that the general inaccessibility of mental 
processes and the continued failure to develop even the semblance of a 
concrete taxonomy of those processes should place such ephemera as 
consciousness and self-awareness outside of the scientific enterprise. If it 
does not do so, psychology will continue to face the prospect of locating, 
not actual cognitive processes, but what may well be "category errors" 
or nominal trivialities in the brain. This by itself should raise concerns 
about the entire enterprise. 
However, this is not the only difficulty faced by those who would seek 
to localize hypothetical components in narrowly circumscribed regions 
of the brain. In this chapter, I consider a number of other impediments, 
both technical and conceptual, that make what may at first seem to be a 
straightforward task into one of great complexity and subtlety, far 
greater than is usually assumed. 
I must make it absolutely clear from the outset that my argument 
against the strategies used to localize cognitive components and modules 
is not an argument for any kind of equipotentiality in the brain. As I 
have noted earlier, there is no question that the brain itself is divided into 
regions exhibiting functional and structural differences, both at the mac­
roscopic and the microscopic level. Rather, I am asserting only that the 
question of the how these regions may be related to various mental pro­
cesses may not, for profound theoretical reasons, be answerable either at 
the present time or in the future, despite the superficial directness that 
seems to be offered by the exciting new imagery techniques. 
This chapter will point out the technical limitations of both tradi­
tional and current procedures, on the one hand, and the conceptual, 
procedural, and logical barriers that stand between the goals of the 
localization enterprise and their ultimate fulfillment, on the other. How-
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
151 
ever compelling our desire to answer questions such as those pro­
posed by localization researchers, must of the current quest is based 
on frail assumptions, technical artifacts, and even ill-posed ques­
tions.1 My purpose here is to raise a flag of caution about the slippery 
slide toward what may be totally incorrect theories and explana­
tions engendered by the ill-conceived quest for an answer to a highly 
problematic question-Where is a mental process located in the 
brain? 
There are three general categories of difficulties (in addition to the 
premier difficulty of defining the psychological components to be local­
ized) facing those who seek to correlate brain areas and psychological 
functions: 
1. Neurophysiological and neuroanatomical difficulties; 
2. Technological and instrumentation difficulties; 
3. Conceptual and logical difficulties. 
Each of these three clusters of difficulties should raise concern that all 
may not be well in a field of such rapidly increasing popularity. 
The distinction between linear and nonlinear is well appreciated 
in mathematical and engineering circles, but ignored by many neuro­
scientists and psychologists, who all too often assume that the brain and 
the behavioral and mental responses it generates constitute a linear sys­
tem that may be decomposed at will into modules and components. This, 
however, is an erroneous assumption, one that perhaps more than any 
other in our science has led to nonsensical theories. To help us clarify the 
nature of this problem, let us carefully define what we mean by linear 
and nonlinear systems. 
A linear system is one in which the various contributing factors 
can simply be added together: these factors do not interact. For example, 
assume that a company is buying reams of three types of paper, Xl> 
X2, and X3, which cost Yb Y2, and Y3 dollars, respectively, and these 
costs are independent of each other. Then the total cost of the reams 
of paper would simply be the sum of the products of the number of 
reams of each type times its respective unit costs: 
1. I am using "ill-posed" here in the formal mathematical sense. That is, a ques­
tion is ill posed if there is inadequate information available in the relevant data­
base to answer it, and additional constraints must be added to do so. 

1 52 
Chapter 4 
(4. 1 )  
In other words, the system can be completely described as the sum o f  its 
individual parts. 
If, however, the cost of any one of the types of paper depends on how 
many of some other type are purchased (for example, the cost of the X3 
paper depends on the number of Xl reams purchased and vice versa), 
then the system is algebraically represented as follows: 
(4.2) 
where j and k indicate the magnitude of the discount. In this case, we can 
completely describe the system as the sum of its parts only when we 
know precisely how those parts interact. This interaction indicates that 
the system of purchasing paper is nonlinear. 
In a simple nonlinear case like this, the mathematics are generally trac­
table provided equations are available to determine all of the unknown 
interactions. In other nonlinear systems, the interactions may be much 
more complex and the mathematics can quickly become totally intracta­
ble. This is the essence of one of the most serious conceptual problems 
encountered in the study of both the brain and behavior-the compo­
nents of these systems are highly interdependent and interact intricately. 
They are, by definition, therefore, nonlinear and often formally intracta­
ble. No matter how clever an experimenter may be, it is not possible to 
solve this class of "problems" by a simple linear addition of the function 
of the individual parts. 
There is a natural tension between nonlinear intractability and our de­
sire to answer some of the fundamental questions of human nature. Un­
fortunately, the desire sometimes prevents us from realizing and 
accepting the intractability. 
4.1 Neuroanatomical and Neurophysiological Problems 
4.1.1 Classic Difficulties with Ablation Experiments 
In chapter 2, I examined some of the techniques popular in previous gen­
erations of physiological psychologies-lesioning, freezing, poisoning, 
stimulating, and recording. Although these older methods have largely 
been replaced by the newer imaging techniques in the quest to localize 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
153 
particular psychological functions in regions of the brain, a review of 
some of the problems faced by practitioners of the older methods can 
help us evaluate the rigor of assumptions underlying both traditional and 
modern techniques. 
As we shall see later in this chapter, and as discussed in Uttal (1978, 
pp. 255-266), even the traditional methods of surgical extirpation and 
neuropsychological observation of the effects of accidental brain injuries 
suffered from anatomic, logical, and procedural difficulties, including 
· inadequate definition of the boundaries of brain regions; 
• system complexity arising from high interconnectivity, feedback, 
feedforward, redundant coding, massive parallelism, interplay of excit­
atory and inhibitory modules, and multiple roles of individual brain 
regIOns; 
variable and idiosyncratic data from human brain injuries; 
· almost exclusive concentration on behavioral deficits; 
· misinterpretation of the effects of inadvertently cut fiber tracts passing 
near or under the lesioned nuclei as functions of the lesioned region. 
• recovery of function (see page 166 for a tabulation of the possible ex­
planations for recovery of function). 
Thus one can argue that the localization enterprise has from its begin­
nings been shadowed by serious and complex conceptual troubles, most 
of which have been seldom discussed. The proponents of the new imag­
ing techniques have, at least to some degree, overlooked or disregarded 
similar problems with their approach. It is to this task that the rest of this 
chapter is dedicated. In considering the problems faced by the imaging 
approach, some of which are novel and some of which are associated 
with the older techniques, I shall focus on empirical and formal argu­
ments that lift the discussion well above speculative arm waving. 
Regions Are Not Sharply Demarcated in the Brain 
Although there is al­
most universal agreement that the brain is not homogeneous, there is 
also abundant evidence that the identified areas of the brain are not pre­
cisely demarcated from one another. This holds true regardless of what 
technique is used to determine the boundaries of the various regions. 
Cytoarchitectonic, electrical recording, stimulation, and extirpation 
techniques yield equivocal and generally differing results with regard to 

1 54 
Chapter 4 
the exact extent of any region. The problem is further compounded in 
the human brain by the nature of the cerebral fissures: where one region 
may at first glance seem to be sharply discontinuous with another, in ac­
tual anatomic fact it gradually fades into that other region deep within a 
fissure. 
That cortical regions substantially overlap has been known for some 
time. Brazier (1961, p. 95) reminds us that the issue was even of impor­
tance to Polish brain physiologists in the late nineteenth and early twen­
tieth century. Among the first to record the spatial course of a response 
elicited on the human cortex by an external stimulus, both N. N. 
Cybulski (1854-1919) and A. Beck (1863-1939) appreciated that the 
various somatic regions overlapped to a considerable degree. 
Although at the time of their original studies, Broca ( 1 861) and 
Wernicke (1874) considered the "speech" regions of the brain to be 
sharply demarcated, by the latter half of the twentieth century, it was 
generally acknowledged that this was not the case. Penfield and Roberts 
(1959, p. 78) observed: "No discrete localization of lesions producing 
various types of agnosia and apraxia [has] been found. It seems as Jack­
son (19 31) stated that any acute lesion to any gross part of the left hemi­
sphere will produce some disturbance in speech." And Lennenberg 
( 1974, p. 524) pointed out that 
there do not seem to be sharply delimited or structurally well defined areas that 
are alone responsible for the appearance of critical specific clinical language 
deficits . . . .  In other words, there are gradients of probability for the occurrence 
of a symptom complex that may appear in connection with a lesion in a given 
area. 
Unfortunately, the traditional view that brain regions are sharply de­
marcated is nowadays accepted (and, perhaps even worse, taught) with 
little attention given to the actual degree of overlap or the precision of 
boundaries between regions. For example, Kandel, Schwartz, and Jessel 
(1995) assert: "Different parts of the brain are specialized for different 
functions" (p. 8) and "Language and other cognitive functions are local­
ized within the cerebral cortex" (p. 9; emphasis added). They give no 
consideration either to the concept of overlap or to statistical probabili­
ties and associations. 
In dogmatically presenting these statements, Kandel et al. (1995) set 
the stage for continued acceptance of mistaken premises about the preci-
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
155 
sion of boundaries between functional areas. Far more illuminating, 
however, is their figure 1-9 (p. 17), in which the progression from purely 
sensory to complex cognitive functions recruits ever larger regions of the 
cerebral cortex in a PET scan. To use such frequently observed PET scan 
results without addressing the technological problem of statistical 
significance (dealt with later in this chapter) is to ignore that the results 
are based on arbitrary and variable criteria. 
Furthermore, current research indicates that the uncertainty about the 
extent of a brain region is not just a matter of arbitrary criteria, but also 
of the dynamic modulation of the putative region by task and by psycho­
logical factors such as attention. Friston, Buechel, et al. (1997) and 
Buechel and Friston (1997) showed that attending and not attending to a 
moving stimulus could produce drastically different fMRI brain re­
sponses. 
Although, to their credit, Kandel et al. (1995) go on to note that it is 
only the elementary components of mind that are localized, not "more 
elaborate faculties," this wisdom appears not to have percolated down to 
a large group of cognitive neuroscientists, who, as we saw in chapters 1 
and 3, are willing to locate some very subtle psychological processes in 
what seem to be very sharply demarcated brain regions. 
Cognitive Functions Activate Broadly Distributed Regions of the Brain 
One of the basic guiding assumptions of any attempt to localize a cogni­
tive function in the brain is that a circumscribed locale for that function 
actually exists. However, it is by no means certain that this is a valid as­
sumption on which to build a theory of the relationship between brain 
and mind. Indeed, there is considerable evidence that the contrary is 
true-that any but the simplest (sensory or motor) cognitive function in­
volves large and distributed regions of the brain. 
There is a substantial history that many, if not all, of the regions of the 
brain may be involved even in such a fundamental type of learning as 
classical conditioning. In one of the most compelling arguments that this 
is so, Olds, Disterhoft, Segal, Kornblith, and Hirsch (1972) described 
their search to localize the neural correlates of simple classical condi­
tioned learning in the rat brain. They discovered that the neurons in­
volved were scattered throughout virtually the entire brain of the rat. 
Although not all nuclei at all levels contained activated neurons, there 

1 56 
Chapter 4 
was no gross (macro) brain level, from the medulla to the neocortex, that 
did not contain at least some neurons that seemed to respond to the 
training. 
At any given level, however, it did appear that the short-latency neu­
rons were to be found within certain relatively well circumscribed nuclei. 
The neurons were most common in the posterior nucleus of the thalamus 
and a few other thalamic nuclei (a surprising location considering the 
generally accepted proposition that the thalamus mainly functions as a 
sensory relay station), the pontine reticular formation and the ventral 
tegmentum. They were also found in the CA3 but not in the CAl region 
of the hippocampus as well as in a number of parts of the cerebral corti­
cal mantle. These regions are the ones to which Olds and his colleagues 
specifically attributed a role in learning. The general thrust of these ex­
perimental results, however, was that the learning process and the result­
ing "engram" are to be found in widely distributed regions throughout 
the entire brain. 
Of course, the experimental animal of choice in this classic experiment 
was the rat, a creature well known to have an unusual brain in a number 
of ways.2 Recent research using animals that are closer to us on the 
phylogenetic tree has, however, come to very much the same conclusion. 
Unfortunately, few of these newer reports are of the heroic proportions 
of Olds et al. 1972, and typically do not record from many different 
parts of the brain. The usual, but logically equivalent, result described in 
these recent reports is to demonstrate that an area long considered to 
have a single function can be activated in surprisingly different ways. All 
of which strongly suggests that, if many processes can activate a single 
region, it is only logical to assume that many different regions are in­
volved in a single process. 
In one very striking example of support for wide distribution of cogni­
tive representations in the brain, Carpenter, Georgopoulos, and Pellizzer 
(1999) have demonstrated that what previously had been considered to 
be purely "motor" cortex is able to both recognize and remember some­
thing as subtle as the serial order of visually displayed, dotted stimulus 
2. For example, the rat's cerebral visual receptive fields are typically simple 
monophasic functions, quite unlike the "Mexican hat" biphasic fields reported in 
cats and monkeys (Gourlay, Uttal, and Powers, 1974). 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
157 
patterns. Carpenter and his colleagues recorded from neurons in the mo­
tor cortex and discovered that the observed neural responses were not 
just associated with particular muscular actions. Rather, many of the 
neurons in this "motor" region seemed to respond to the joint influence 
of the serial order and the position of the stimulus. This result was inter­
preted to mean that the neurons were able to recognize and remem­
ber aspects of the prolonged training protocol that the monkeys had 
undergone. 
Thus, processes involved in complex scene interpretation, including 
recognition and learning of various types, are actually encoded in and 
represented by regions of the brain not usually considered to be involved 
in this kind of cognitive functioning. The traditional interpretation has 
been that these regions are exclusively motor output controllers. The 
assumption of extreme localization on which modern cognitive neuro­
sciences bases so much of its current research program is severely chal­
lenged by such a result. 
Similar evidence exists that the cerebellum, a region classically consid­
ered to be involved solely in the coordination of motor movements, may 
have substantial cognitive functions as well. Thompson ( 1990) and his 
group have been studying the conditioning of the response of a rabbit's 
eyelid to a conditioned stimulus (CS)-a tone-paired with an uncondi­
tioned stimulus (UCS)-a puff of air. If lesions are made in the cerebel­
lum in particular regions (see page 21), the rabbits are unable to 
associate the CS with the UCS and do not learn to respond to the tone. 
This certainly would be considered bf many in the localization business 
to be prima facie evidence that the learning is at least controlled by, and 
maybe mediated by and even encoded in, the cerebellum. This classic sin­
gle dissociation experiment is of exactly the same logical genre as the 
typical lesion experiment of a few decades ago and leads to much the 
same conclusions reached by neuropsychologists with regard to fortu­
itous brain injuries. That conditioned learning occurs at all in the cere­
bellum, however, contradicts the usual localization of "learning" in the 
cerebrum. 
Whether conditioned learning of this kind occurs because of neural 
changes localized solely in the cerebellum is only one part of a more 
widely distributed "learning" system, or involves the complex inter-

1 58 
Chapter 4 
action of many regions of the brain, serious questions are raised about 
invoking a single specific locale for even such a well studied and super­
ficially simple "cognitive" process as classical conditioning. 
The expanded role for the cerebellum in the representation of other, 
more cognitive, functions than motor coordination has been summarized 
by Muller, Courchesne, and Allen (1998, p. 880), who cite a number of 
results that suggest that the cerebellum regulates, controls, or represents 
functions far beyond simple (or even complex) motor mechanisms in­
cluding 
1. the presence of neurons in the cerebellum sensitive to tactile stimuli; 
2. neural activity in the cerebellum during language processing even 
when the motor aspects of speech are suppressed or controlled; 
3. neural activity in the cerebellum during problem solving; and 
4. neural activity in the cerebellum during memory tasks. 
(For additional information on the role of the cerebellum in a diversity of 
cognitive tasks, see also Schmahmann, 1997.) 
Just as traditional motor regions appear to play more extensive roles in 
higher cognitive processes than once supposed, so, too, even the tradi­
tional sensory regions appear to have functions far beyond those sug­
gested by our current theories and models. Stein and Meredith (1993), in 
their comprehensive review of the literature on the overlap of the various 
sensory and motor regions of the brain in a number of different animals, 
describe the many different studies showing that these regions overlap 
substantially in most of the experimental animals. This overlap can be 
expressed in several different ways. First, the lines of demarcation be­
tween the several "sensory" regions are not sharp. Second, there is con­
siderable overlap between these fuzzy boundaries. Third, many neurons, 
supposedly centrally located in a particular sensory region turn out to be 
multimodal-in that they can be activated by several different receptor 
modalities. The analysis produced by Stein and Meredith strongly sup­
ports the argument that the maps sharply defining sensory and motor 
function that have been a part of the physiological psychology culture 
for so many years may be seriously misleading. 
How could neuroscientific thinking so pervasively fail to appreciate the 
fuzziness of the boundaries between the cortical regions? The answer 
may well lie in some methodological quirks. Whenever the cerebral cor-
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
159 
tex was examined for either motor or sensory functions, a decision about 
an acceptable threshold of activation had to be made. The very presence 
of such a cutoff limit on what would be accepted as "activation" inevita­
bly came to mean that a sharp boundary was artificially created where 
none actually existed. That artificial boundary, however much the dia­
grams may have seemed to suggest it, was not the boundary between ac­
tivity and no activity, but rather an arbitrary boundary between different 
levels of activity or sensitivity. The arbitrariness of the criterion used to 
determine that boundary was generally ignored. As the data were pub­
lished and republished, however, the concept of sharply demarcated re­
gion for any of the sensory regions became instantiated in physiological 
psychology's theories and models. As we now see, the boundaries of the 
sensory and motor regions are not so clear-cut: there is considerable 
overlap among them, and, indeed, there is intrusion of one into the other 
at all levels of the brain. 
The problems with the "intrinsic" or "association areas," in which the 
intermediate cognitive processes linking the input sensory pathways to 
the output motor responses are purported to reside, are even more com­
plicated. As noted earlier, these transforming regions lack the anchor to 
the physical world enjoyed by the input and output stages of behavior. 
They also suffer particularly from the primary difficulty in the localiza­
tion enterprise-the lack of clear definitions of the mental processes that 
are purported to be carried out in these regions. 
That cognitive processes involve widely dispersed regions of the cere­
bral cortex has been appreciated for over a hundred years. Farah (1994, 
p. 43) calls our attention to a comment by Ferrier (1886): 
The fact that the various parts of the encephalon, though anatomically distinct, 
are yet so intimately combined and related as to form a complex whole, makes it 
natural to suppose that lesions of a greater or lesser extent in any one part should 
produce such general perturbation of the functions of the organ as a whole as to 
render it at least highly difficult to trace any uncomplicated connection between 
the symptoms produced and the lesion as such. 
Nowhere has the same point been more eloquently expressed than by 
Luria (1966, p. 691): 
The clinical evidence shows that any complex behavioral function (perception, 
action, speech, writing, reading, calculation) is never lost in a patient with a le­
sion of only one circumscribed area of the cortex, but it may be impaired in 

1 60 
Chapter 4 
lesions of widely different areas of the brain, sometimes far distant from each 
other. At the same time, a lesion of one circumscribed area of the brain never 
leads to the isolated loss of any one complex behavioral function, but causes a 
group of disturbances which, although they always possess some common link, is 
reflected in the normal course of what are apparently diverse functions. 
This same point of view is held by some of the most active and produc­
tive leaders of the scanning approach to brain localization. Thus, for ex­
ample, Roland et al. (1995, p. 784) contend: 
All types of brain work-learning, recall, recognition, motor planning, motor ex­
ecution, perception, and thinking-are associated with activations of multiple 
fields in cortex . . .  the cerebral cortex participates in brain work in awake human 
subjects by activating multiple cortical fields for each task. 
These deep and persistent insights have seemingly not displaced the pre­
vailing conviction among many cognitive neuroscientists that a radically 
specialized modularity exists in the brain. As this chapter illustrates, this 
conviction runs counter to simple logic as well as to a large body of evi­
dence, to which we may add the following: 
1. Kertesz (1979), using a radioisotope marker techniques, has produced 
some composite charts that show that the brains of clinically defined 
aphasic patients can exhibit extremely wide-ranging lesions. Damage, for 
example, can occur at virtually any location (with the curious exception 
of the prefrontal lobes) to produce what is called "global aphasia." 
2. Kohler, Moscovitch, Winocur, Houle, and McIntosh (1998), using a 
PET scanning technique, have discovered that episodic memory elicits 
activities in many different areas widely distributed across the brain. 
These areas include the right middle occipital gyrus, the supramarginal 
gyrus, the superior temporal sulcus, the bilateral lingual and fusiform 
gyri, as well as in the prefrontal cortex. They conclude: 
Together our data suggest that encoding and retrieval in episodic memory de­
pend on the interplay between domain-specific structures, most of which are in­
volved in memory as well as perception, and domain-general structures, some of 
which operate more at encoding and others more at retrieval. (p. 129) 
3. Clark, Fannon, Lai, Benson, and Bauer (2000), using a new technique 
for recording event-related fMRI responses (see page 194), reported that 
target stimuli produced responses that not only were totally different 
from those produced by distractor stimuli in a "three-stimulus oddball" 
experiment, but, again, were widely distributed across the brain. 
4. Jiang, Haxby, Martin, Ungerleider, and Parasuraman (2000), also us­
ing event-related fMRI procedures, have found that the brain responses 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 61 
involved in recognizing target faces versus distracter faces exhibited dif­
ferent patterns of activation in widely distributed regions. Responses 
produced by the target faces included occipital, parietal, temporal, fron­
tal, and supplementary motor areas. 
5. Buechel and Friston (1997) have also shown that a moving pattern of 
dots can produce fMRI responses in three different regions-VI, V5, the 
posterior parietal region-and that this pattern varies with the degree to 
which the stimulus is attended. 
Clearly, the basic assumption of sharply localized brain representa­
tions of mental activity, challenged over a period of a century, is now un­
der a new kind of empirical attack using the very tools that were 
originally used to support it. 
Brain Regions Are Complexly Interconnected 
As can be seen through­
out this chapter, there are some unexpressed and hidden assumptions in­
volved in the quest to localize particular mental activities in particular 
parts of the brain. A hidden assumption very close to the surface of our 
discussion is that the nervous system is made up of modules organized in 
such a way that they can and ultimately will be isolated and independ­
ently assayed. For example, the argument is often made that we should 
be able to specify the hierarchy of interconnections among a cluster of in­
teracting centers. This concept has, however, been challenged by findings 
from a surprising subsystem of the brain-the ensemble of regions in­
volved in processing visual information. 
For reasons that are well known (e.g., its stimulus anchor, the primar­
ily afferent flow, relatively straightforward coding, and representation of 
information within it), a system of cerebral components has been 
identified that plays an important role in processing visually acquired in­
formation. Current knowledge of the organization of this system has 
been summarized by Felleman and Van Essen (1991) in the form of a hi­
erarchical chart showing the brain regions and the interconnections 
among them. There is no question that this chart is very complicated, 
showing many feedback and feedforward links between the various areas 
and centers involved in vision. This well-accepted version of the organi­
zation of the visual brain, which at the very least serves to enhance our 
appreciation of the many regions shown to be anatomically interrelated, 
may nevertheless be quite incorrect:. 

1 62 
Chapter 4 
Hilgetag et al. (1996) have pointed out that, owing to basic properties 
of interconnected networks, complex systems like this cannot be orga­
nized into a unique hierarchical organizational chart in the way that 
Felleman and Van Essen ( 1 991) have suggested. There is thus an in­
principle barrier to the specification of a network hierarchy from obser­
vations of the components and the interconnections of that network, no 
matter how many experiments may be carried out. Hilgetag et al.'s criti­
cism cannot be put aside simply by alluding to the need for "additional 
research. "  Rather, their computational analysis has shown that the ana­
tomical constraints (i.e., data) are insufficient to specify any unique hier­
archical arrangement as the actual one. Indeed, because the number of 
possible computed hierarchies with a given set of data seems to be 
infinite, they argue that "The information in the anatomical constraints 
cannot be expressed satisfactorily by any single hierarchical ordering. 
Further, conclusions drawn from considering only a single hierarchy will 
be misleading" (p. 776); moreover, they note that the hierarchy proposed 
by Felleman and Van Essen contains "eight violations and three fewer 
levels of visual cortical areas than any of the computed optimal hierar­
chies" (p. 776). 
It is important to point out, however, that Hilgetag et al. ( 1 996) are 
not denying that the primate cortex is hierarchical. Rather, they are as­
serting that "it is not possible to determine the exact hierarchy" (p. 776). 
Thus Felleman and Van Essen's map (1991) and others like it, though 
useful perhaps as tutorial aids, are not unique statements of the true ar­
rangement of the parts of the brain. If this situation obtains in systems as 
relatively well defined and well anchored as the visual system, then imag­
ine how much more difficult it must be to achieve a corresponding goal 
for higher-level cognitive functions. 
Another way to express this same principle of brain complexity has 
been offered by Shall ice (1988, p. 29) in the context of amnesia studies: 
. . .  it is virtually impossible to rule out the possibility that any association ob­
served between two different deficits arises not because the same function subsys­
tem is responsible for both relevant processes, but because more than one func­
tional subsystem has been damaged in some patients in the group. 
That the brain is composed of a heavily interconnected set of centers is 
well established. Indeed, connections exist between the two cerebral 
hemispheres through the great commissures. The exact details of these 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 63 
interconnections are not yet completely known, but clearly the brain is 
not a simple conglomerate of functionally isolated processing sites. 
The idea that brain regions are complexly interconnected and that the 
resulting interactions may be more characteristic of the brain as a whole 
than of any localized and specialized region has been percolating recently 
into the literature that compares cognitive processes and fMRI re­
sponses. For example, Friston (1997, 1998, 2000a, 2000b, 2000c) has 
added a strong note of clarification to the notion that a cognitive process 
is localized in a particular region of the brain. Emphasizing that imaged 
brain responses are extremely context dependent, he argues persuasively 
that efforts directed at making maps of functional responses would be 
better directed at determining the interactions that occur between brain 
regions. The sources of the interactions are many: both the anatomy and 
the distributed nature of the brain regions involved in such processes as 
attention can drastically alter the pattern of observed fMRI responses. 
Although, according to Friston, the proper goal of neuroscience should 
be to search for these interactions, given the nonlinear nature of the 
brain-mind, it is not at all clear that we could attain that goal. Neverthe­
less, if we followed Friston's lead, the mind-brain problem would, at the 
very least, become framed in the proper context-interactive integration 
of multiple components and regions. If this conceptual reframing-from 
localized specialization to interactive integration-were to occur, many 
of the peculiar logical and conceptual deficiencies introduced by the 
imaging approach might disappear. 
Lesion Experiments Can Confirm Necessity but Not Sufficiency 
Be­
cause the brain's regions are so heavily interconnected and because cog­
nitive processes appear to interact so strongly, the results of classic brain 
lesion experiments should also be interpreted with caution. Any decline 
in performance on a specific cognitive task may be affected by an experi­
mental lesion in many different ways. If the nervous system was truly 
made up of a number of independent modules, each solely responsible 
for a single cognitive task, then an experimental lesion in any one might 
well produce a diminution in the ability to perform a specific task. Any 
of the regions being lesioned in this case would a priori be both necessary 
and sufficient for carrying out the processes associated with the perfor­
mance of that task. 

1 64 
Chapter 4 
Suppose however, that what the neuroscientist is actually examining is 
a distributed system of heavily interconnected and interacting regions 
rather than a collection of functionally isolated modules. In this case, the 
extirpation of any one of a number of these interacting cortical regions 
could also produce exactly the same performance decrement observed in 
the simpler case of independent modules. The difficulty is that, although 
the behavioral change might be exactly the same, the deficit might very 
likely be the result of an entirely different organizational aspect of the 
system. If truly modular brain units existed, the region that had been re­
moved could be deemed both necessary and sufficient for the cognitive 
process underlying the execution of the task. In a heavily interconnected 
system, on the other hand, the removed region could play a secondary or 
even tertiary role in that process. Or removing the region could actually 
release some other region from being inhibited and the activation of that 
other region might then inhibit still another region. In other words, al­
though necessary for the successful functioning of the complex system, 
the surgical removal might have destroyed a region that was not by itself 
sufficient to produce the behavior being observed. Clearly, any region of 
the brain that is dependent on the function of another region may be 
strongly affected by a lesion in that other region, even if the other region 
actually played no direct role in the process. There is even a neologism 
for such an interaction-diaschisis. In the case of a system of regions that 
collectively encoded or represented a given cognitive process, the confu­
sion could be even greater.3 
In light of these plausible (and, given the complexity of interactions be­
tween cerebral centers, likely) alternatives, it is dismaying to see how of­
ten researchers working with equivocal data that demonstrate, at best, 
necessity, leap to the conclusion that the lesioned region was, in fact, 
sufficient to encode, represent, or serve as the psychoneural equivalent of 
the cognitive process under investigation. Make no mistake, the associa­
tion of a cognitive function with a particular region of the brain from 
such equivocal data is based on the still unsupported presumption of 
sufficiency. 
3. It would be impossible to distinguish between a system in which the functions 
were distributed and one in which an irrelevant interaction occurred: either type 
of system could produce the same kind of results. 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 65 
The salient point here-all too often overlooked by those using brain 
lesion procedures-is that the behavioral changes observed in classic le­
sion experiments are, in point of fact and logic, neutral with regard to 
the actual organization of the neural mechanisms underlying those be­
haviors. Indeed, a subtle realization of this point may have contributed 
to diminishing interest in neuroscience research based on such proce­
dures in recent years. That the newest approaches to localization-the 
imaging techniques-also presume sufficiency where necessity alone has 
been demonstrated should raise some warning flags. 
Human Neuropsychological and Experimental Data Are Idiosyncratic 
Many conclusions about the localization of psychological processes in 
the brain have been drawn from the results of accidents or therapeuti­
cally necessary brain lesioning procedures on humans. Indeed, the earli­
est studies of the effect of brain lesions were largely based on injuries sus­
tained in wars or in bizarre industrial accidents such as that of Phineas 
Gage.4 In recent years, considerable attention has been directed at lesions 
produced by diseases of one kind or another. Unfortunately, results of 
such uncontrolled natural experiments vary substantially from one con­
dition to another. Although some generalities have emerged from the 
data (e.g., contralateral motor control, lateralization of the left and right 
hemiretinas in each eye), a survey of the literature reveals serious doubts 
that such experiments can yield replicable findings on the precise local­
ization of high-level cognitive processes. 
The problem, as Shallice (1988) among others points out, is that by av­
eraging together the data obtained from a number of different subjects, 
one creates a pseudo-localization, a false model of the brain that ignores 
the very wide discrepancies that can occur between individuals. In some 
cases, such a pooling of the data of individuals could even lead to the 
false appearance of localization when in fact there is none. The problem 
is exaggerated when cortical variability is heaped on the ill-defined na­
ture of some of the deficits for which a specific brain locale is sought. 
4. The Phineas Gage tale has become such a mainstay of pop psychology that it 
true significance is often lost in the telling. For a more balanced account, see 
Macmillan, 2000, a book in which the fantastic aspects are separated from the 
scientifically interesting ones. 

1 66 
Chapter 4 
This is not an unfamiliar problem. It is commonly faced in other scien­
tific fields whenever statistical analyses of variable data are used to esti­
mate central tendencies. The process of pooling data in psychophysical 
experiments by invoking simple power or logarithmic laws can result in 
response functions that are totally unlike those of any of the individual 
subjects. Similarly, in studies of brain localization, the pooling of a num­
ber of broad regions of activity from individuals can produce a fortuitous 
overlap that suggests a narrowly localized region where none exists. 
The variability in the spatial dimensions of the proposed cerebral lo­
cales we have considered is matched by dynamic changes in localization 
occurring after an injury or after new experiences. Recovery of function 
poses profound problems for any study that purports to determine the 
effect of brain lesions on psychological functions. Not having a stable 
"platform" introduces not only confounds but also uncertainty as to 
which of several different, if not all equally plausible, explanations in 
fact accounts for the functional recovery. I have previously (Uttal, 1978, 
p. 285) tabulated some of these alternative and occasionally contradic­
tory explanations: 
1 .  The original behavioral deficit was not caused by the specific lesion but by a 
general "shock" from which the subject subsequently recovered. 
2. A redundant system took over the function that was originally lost. 
3. The ablated tissue recovered by regeneration. 
4. The new behavior is not the same as the one originally lost, but a new func­
tion of a previously undisturbed region that has taken over the role played by the 
lesioned area. 
S. The original lesion did not remove all of the brain tissue necessary to produce 
the temporarily lost behavior. 
Recovery of function after intentional or fortuitous damage to the 
brain is not the only potential source of a dynamic temporal reorganiza­
tion of the brain system. Zheng and Knudsen ( 1 999) have recently re­
ported that even well-established 
sensory 
maps can reorganize 
themselves: after lesioning, new functional pathways and new loci of ac­
tivity appear to be created in the barn owl's brain. Such reorganization 
actually occurs even in the peripheral portions of the nervous system. 
Given that the central parts of the brain are generally considered to be 
the most flexible and adaptive, what extraordinary plasticity might be 
seen there? 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 67 
The inference one can draw from the idiosyncrasies in both time (brain 
systems dynamically change) and space (brain systems are not arranged 
in the same way in every individual) is that individual data from either 
"definitive" neuropsychological observations or best-controlled animal 
experiments represent a treacherous base on which to build a theory of 
brain localization. The averaging of neuropsychological results is likely 
to produce a model of precise localization where none may aCtually 
exist. 
In summary, there are many technical problems with any kind of lesion 
data. As noted earlier, lesions may interrupt tracts of passage from one 
region to another and thus produce behavioral results that can all too 
easily be misassociated with the region of the lesion. Other regions of the 
brain may participate in (i.e., be necessary), but not be the unique (i.e., 
sufficient) locus of, the mechanism underlying a behavioral deficit. Other 
centers may actually be responsible for multiple behaviors but, because 
of the behavioral assay method used, appear to have only singular func­
tions. Collectively, all these problems and difficulties continue to raise 
concerns about basing theories of a modular brain chiefly on data from 
fortuitous or laboratory-induced lesions. All such data must be deemed 
substantially equivocal. 
Can we ever hope to collect convincing data with the new imaging 
techniques to resolve these uncertainties? Given the mathematical con­
clusions of such investigators as Hilgetag et al. (1996), a likely working 
answer to this question is no. Obviously, many of these concerns also 
carry over into the new world of PET and fMRI systems. 
4.2 Technological and Instrumentation Problems 
4.2.1 The Threshold Effect in Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
In section 4.1, we consider methodological artifacts rooted in the 
neuroanatomy and neurophysiology of the brain that should raise cau­
tions about whether cognitive processes can be precisely localized there. 
In particular, I considered the use of arbitrary criterion thresholds below 
or above which regional "activation" was deemed "significant" and thus 
present. Evidence of sharply defined and highly localized artificial boun­
daries arising from a poor choice of a threshold could easily lead to an 

1 68 
Chapter 4 
erroneous conclusion about the cerebral localization or nonlocalization 
of a psychological process. 
It turns out that there is a comparable, but much more explicit and me­
chanical, criterion-level artifact at work in when imaging techniques are 
used to localize psychological functions. This artifact takes the form of 
the choice of a particular setting on the computer displaying the images 
obtained with an fMRI machine. Specifically, it has to do with the arbi­
trariness in selecting the false colors used to indicate the amplitude of ab­
solute or differential responses obtained at various stages in the analytic 
process. The difference image is presumed to reflect the extent of a brain 
region associated with the cognitive process under study. 
The problem is that the assignment of colors to various levels of ac­
tivity is completely arbitrary. It is up to the experimenter to decide 
whether any of the various levels should be colored and what colors 
should be used and thus what significance should be attached to the 
difference scores produced by subtraction of the control and experi­
mental images. A conservative assignment could hide localized activity 
and a reckless one suggest unique localizations that are entirely 
artifactual. 
Clearly, the problem of criterion level arises whenever signals are hid­
den in noise or tests of statistical significance must be used to evaluate 
and interpret observations. Because the two fMRI images fed into the 
subtraction process are going to be noisy and to consist of widely distrib­
uted activity, there is a problem of choosing a criterion level such that the 
"false alarm" rate and the "hit" rate are kept in optimum balance. Be­
cause these two measures are functions of each other whenever the un­
derlying distributions of signal and signal plus noise, respectively, 
overlap, it is impossible to zero either rate without creating compensa­
tory difficulties in the other. If one reduces the false alarm rate, one must 
increase the incorrect rejections. If one increases the hit rate, one neces­
sarily increases the false alarm rate. Completely eliminating the two 
kinds of errors is impossible. Derived directly from the impeccable logic 
of signal detection theory (SDT) as described by Tanner and Swets 
( 1 954), this line of thought can be applied to any situation where deci­
sions must be made about signals hidden in noise-the exact situation 
faced by those interpreting imaging data. 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 69 
Wise et al. (1991, p. 1 8 15) have discussed the problem of setting crite­
rion-level thresholds in the context of PET activation studies: 
There is a final, general caveat . . .  and that is the presentation of data in terms of 
s!gnificantly activated regions. [IJnsignificant trends are lost in such a presenta­
tlOnǁ and such trends may ultimately increase our knowledge of cognitive pro­
cessIng when we are In a pOSItion to analyze the data in a more hypothesis-led 
way at which time the level of significance can be justifiably reduced. 
The problem in following this advice is that, with lower criterion levels , 
more and more regions are likely to be shown to be activated. The end 
result would thus support the view I believe to be correct, namely, that 
broad distribution rather than narrow localization characterizes the ac­
tivity of the brain. Nevertheless, the point is well made by Wise and his 
colleagues-varying the threshold is going to have a major effect on 
what regions are shown to have been activated. 
4.2.2 Other Technical Problems 
As elegant and powerful as they may seem, the scanning techniques are 
not simple tools that one can manipulate with the ease of, say, driving a 
car. Subtle interpretations and multidimensional judgments are de­
manded of the scientist who moves into the imaging laboratory. The 
evaluation of the results forthcoming from an fMRI system, for example, 
involve a number of complex steps in the processing that are not always 
obvious to the scientist using the devices. As described in chapter 2, there 
is a chain of assumptions and technical processes that make the interpre­
tation of these wonderful images less than immediately direct. Initially, 
there is an assumption that a heightened metabolism in a given region of 
the brain is tantamount to that region's participation in the cognitive 
process being investigated. As we have also seen, this is counterindicated 
by a number of observations ranging from the earliest observations of al­
pha blockade in EEG measurements to the idea that an increase in activ­
ity in a inhibitory system can lead to a decrease in cognitive activity. This 
kind of negative correlation has to be weighed carefully in evaluating the 
validity of the "metabolic activity = cognitive activity" association that 
lies at the base of the entire localization enterprise, including its modern 
manifestation in the imaging laboratory. 
Similarly, although the link between chiefly synaptic activity and neu­
ral metabolism, on the one hand, and glucose and oxygen consumption, 

1 70 
Chapter 4 
on the other, seems to be well established, these activities are not what is 
usually measured. Rather, it is the amount of blood flowing to a region 
that is the main measure used by cognitive neuroscientists in their search 
for the locale of some mental activity. Given the complexity of blood 
flow control at the fine level of regional capillaries, the correlation be­
tween the exact correspondence of blood flow and metabolism may not 
be exact. Roland (1993) and Greenberg, Hand, Sylvestro, and Reivich 
( 1 979), though generally supporting the blood flow-metabolism link, 
cautiously call for continual evaluation of this essential assumption in 
using fMRI or PET data to localize psychological functions. 
Others have not been quite so optimistic about some of the potential 
difficulties encountered if one uncritically accepts this assumption. Some 
technical problems concerning the direct linkage of blood flow and oxy­
gen metabolism have been raised by Vanzetta and Grimvald ( 1 999) 
among others. They note that in many experiments there have been dis­
crepancies between the fMRI and PET estimates of blood flow and direct 
measurements of oxygen usage. The problem arises because an increase 
in blood flow does not occur simultaneously with an increase in oxygen 
consumption-the former lags behind the latter. The delay between the 
two measures and the fact that most current fMRI procedures are mainly 
sensitive to the later components of blood flow often give rise to results 
that differ in their respective definitions of the regions that appear to be 
activated during cognitive processes. Although Vanzetta and Grimvald 
suggest that tuning the fMRI device to concentrate on early components 
of the blood flow can help to alleviate this problem, this result lends fur­
ther support to the position that one of the key steps in the chain of as­
sumptions from neuronal activity to measured blood flow may not be as 
sound as is often assumed by contemporary workers. 
Roland et al. ( 1 995) have also pointed out that, for accurate imaging, 
the tracer substances used in PET scans must readily diffuse to the re­
gions of high metabolism. Nevertheless, because the most often used 
tracer-radioactive water (H2015)-does not readily diffuse, several fur­
ther assumptions must be incorporated into any analyses to make sense 
of ever more complex data. 
The complexity of the chain of assumptions from metabolism to cogni­
tion is further compounded by the elusive temporal and spatial proper­
ties of the imaging techniques and the natural randomness of human 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 71 
brain sizes and shapes. To overcome this problem, many averaging and 
normalizing procedures are used (to be discussed later in this chapter) 
that add further distance between the actual measurements and their in­
terpretation by the investigating neuroscientist. Finally, efforts to reduce 
image noise by various filtering algorithms introduce further uncertain­
ties that remain to be explored. 
Other, purely technical (i.e., physical and electronic) artifacts can dis­
tort or even misplace portions of the image. Although some of these arti­
facts have little to do with the topic at hand, others have the potential to 
make the images as equivocal as some of the conceptual and psychologi­
cal problems we have discussed. For example, Hornak (1 999) lists the 
following potential artifacts and their most likely causes in his web text 
on the basics of fMRI imaging: 
Artifact 
RF quadrature 
Bo inhomogeneity 
Gradient 
RF inhomogeneity 
Motion 
Flow 
Chemical shift 
Partial volume 
Wrap around 
Cause 
Failure of RF detection circuitry 
Metal object distorting Bo field 
Failure in magnetic field gradient 
Failure of RF coil 
Movement of imaged object during sequence 
Movement of body fluids during sequence 
Large Bo and chemical shift difference between 
tissues 
Large voxel size 
Improperly chosen field of view 
Reiman et al. (2000) also discuss some of the artifacts that can occur 
when the fMRI procedure is used without careful attention to the com­
plexities of the recording process, the psychological uncertainties, and 
the mathematical tools used for analysis. In addition to some of those 
mentioned by Hornak ( 1999), they also note the possibility of emotional 
effects on the blood flow in the carotid artery that may mimic or distort 
cognitive influences. They even note that muscular responses such as 
"teeth clenching" can produce spurious results and false localizations of 
cognitive processes. 
More serious artifacts, however, emʒrge as a result of the tasks that 
subjects are asked to perform in the scanning experiments. According to 
Reiman and his colleagues (2000), there is no independent assurance that 

1 72 
Chapter 4 
the cognitive effects desired when the experimenter sets us up the experi­
ments are actually extant during the course of the measurements: 
Differing instructional sets fail to influence the cognitive activity of interest, 
yielding no observable difference in brain regions which are indeed substrates for 
that cognitive process . . . .  This outcome is likely to arise not because the "active" 
task fails to engage the targeted process, but because the "baseline" process does 
so as well. 
In sum, because all imaging methods are based on a complex series of 
technical assumptions and processes that are potential sources of uncer­
tainty and artifacts, using them to localize cognitive processes may result 
in misassociating those processes with particular regions of the brain. Of 
the technical difficulties the psuedocoloring difficulty (i.e., the arbitrari­
ness of the criterion threshold) is potentially the most serious. However, 
the conceptual difficulties to be discussed next pose far more profound 
challenges to the validity of imaging methods as a locator of brain mod­
ules, highlighting problems in the fundamental logic and assumptions of 
the entire localization enterprise that may be even more subtle and dis­
concerting than the technical problems. 
4.3 Conceptual and Logical Problems 
Even though the number of technical problems involved in correlating 
brain locations and mental processes discussed thus far are important 
and often overlooked, there is a far more serious group of problems that 
arise out of the concepts, logic, and assumptions underlying the entire lo­
calization enterprise. There is, surprisingly, a substantial literature that 
speaks to these issues, but in the rush to achieve what may not be achiev­
able, it has been largely ignored. 
Most of the problems we shall consider here deal with the logic of ex­
perimental design. Before proceeding to the assumptions underlying the 
new imaging techniques, however, I first review in roughly chronological 
order several challenges raised to using those techniques for localizing 
cognitive processes in specific regions of the brain. 
Criticisms directed against the theory that specific functions were lo­
calized in particular regions of the brain have been around for quite a 
while. The argument against phrenology discussed in chapter 3 repre-
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 73 
sents one prong of these criticisms; the holistic argument made by Freud 
(1 891), who presciently challenged radical and specific localization on 
the logical grounds that even a good correlation between a lesioned brain 
region and a given behavior was not proof that the region was the site of 
the behavior, represents another. 
However, one does not have to go back to the nineteenth century to 
find arguments against brain or behavior modularity, or against both. As 
recently as 1950, Lashley was still arguing, with the support of many of 
his contemporaries, that the brain was equipotential and that no cogni­
tive process could be specifically localized. His argument, in what is now 
considered to be one of the great classics of psychological science 
(Lashley, 1950), was succinct and to the point, if not sustained by subse­
quent research: "All of the cells of the brain are constantly active and are 
participating, by a sort of algebraic summation, in every activity. There 
are no special cells for special memories" (p. 477). Even though we know 
that the particular animal (the rat) Lashley used and the kind of experi­
ments he performed are no longer adequate to provide support for such a 
radical stance on the equipotentiality of brain tissue, the repudiation of 
this "mass action" point of view was more evolutionary than revolution­
ary. However, it was not so much the repudiation of equipotentiality as it 
was the reemergence of earlier localization ideas that led to the equally 
radical stance on localization in brain regions so prevalent these days 
among cognitive psychologists, neuroscientists, and neuropsychologists. 
At Lashley's time, of course, the main localization method was the lesion 
procedure-cut out a piece of brain and observe the resulting behavioral 
deficits. 
Some countercriticisms of the use of lesion experiments as the basis for 
conclusions about localization of function, however, arose fairly quickly 
and still ring true. Gregory (1961) questioned the logic of both the stimu­
lation and the ablation (lesion) procedures as they were conventionally 
used around the middle of the twentieth century to search for localized 
regions responsible for particular psychological functions in the brain. 
His argument was based on a simple but clear-cut analogy between the 
evolved brain and hardware engineered by humans: 
Suppose we ablated or stimulated various parts of a complex man-made device, 
say a television receiving set. And suppose we had no prior knowledge of the 

1 74 
Chapter 4 
manner of function of the type of device or machine involved. Could we by these 
means discover its manner of working? (p. 320) 
Gregory ( 1961) argued that, in general, such a procedure could not 
work, that we must know at least something about how such a device 
operates to pursue the functional analysis. Although there are some 
things that can be learned from this procedure-he suggested that we 
might be able to "map projection areas and delimit pathways" 
{p. 322)-Gregory asserted that it is all but impossible to define the 
causal relations of such a heavily interconnected system: there are so 
many different arrangements of the parts that could produce similar re­
sults. "Suppose," he went on to say, we ablate or stimulate some part of 
the brain, and lose or evoke something in behavior, then it is not clear­
even quite apart for previous considerations-that this region is the seat 
of the behavior in question" (p. 324). 
Gregory is alluding to two of the themes that pervade all subsequent 
criticisms of the localization approach-the necessity for some prior the­
oretical knowledge and the very high probability of mistaking what 
seems to be a simple dissociation for a key and essential functional repre­
sentation. Unfortunately, these remarkably anticipatory insights were 
thoroughly ignored by his contemporaries and the experimental lesion 
procedures Gregory chastised simply faded away, only when it became 
more or less obvious to its practitioners that little progress was being 
made in answering the questions being asked. 
Criticisms of lesion techniques became more sophisticated in subse­
quent years. Nevertheless, their essential point remained the same-ana­
lyzing a complex nonlinear, heavily interconnected system may simply 
not be doable. As time went on, the language and conceptual arguments 
against radical localization arguments evolved into something far more 
complex. Wood (1978), for example, renewed the attack on localization 
theory by stimulating a lesion experiment on a mathematical model of 
learning developed by Anderson, Silverstein, Ritz, and Jones ( 1977), a 
model based on a network of equipotential neurons similar in concept to 
Lashley's original mass action theory of equal roles for all participating 
neurons. Wood's method tested the Anderson et al. model by systemati­
cally removing neurons in specific places and in varying amounts. To the 
degree that the model simulated the mass action or equipotentiality idea, 
this was intended to be a direct analog of the original experiments car-
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 75 
ried out by Lashley. But Wood (1978) had a second, broader goal in us­
ing the Anderson et al. (1977) model: "to assess the degree to which 
principles of neural organization such as equipotentiality and localiza­
tion of function can be inferred from lesion experiments" (p. 583). In 
other words, he wanted to use this type of model to resolve the conten­
tious issue of modularity versus equipotentiality. 
Wood's experiments (1978) were statistical and mathematically for­
mal. He did no surgery and observed no organic behavior. Nevertheless, 
his conclusion was profoundly relevant to the argument made here. 
What he found was that the model was perfectly capable of producing 
results that supported both the radical equipotentiality and the radical 
specificity conclusions: 
The present results provide additional evidence of the profound logical 
difficulties in attempting to infer principles of neural organization from the re­
sults of lesion experiments. A persistent behavioral deficit following removal of a 
given brain region is often regarded as demonstrating that the region plays a spe­
cific functional role. Although this conclusion may be correct, similar lesion ef­
fects can also be obtained in nervous systems in which each neural element par­
ticipates in a wide range of functions, depending upon task requirements. As the 
present results demonstrate, discriminating between these alternatives on the ba­
sis of the results of lesion experiments is a difficult if not impossible task. (p. 590) 
After prominently featuring and discussing Wood, 1978, Shallice 
(1988) proposed a counterargument. Whereas Wood had argued that the 
Anderson et al. (1977) model could support either an equipotential or a 
modular type of organization, Shallice argued that this conclusion was 
spurious because it depended on the specific network that Anderson and 
colleagues had modeled and because Wood had ignored single dissocia­
tion data. Specifically, Shallice suggested that Wood's conclusion was 
built on a special case that involved only the careful selection of a single 
input neuron from among many possible candidates. 
Shallice's critique can be countered in two ways. First, mathematical 
models are in general neutral with regard to the underlying mathematics 
(Uttal 1998). Second (as presented later in this chapter), "dissociation" 
experiments, even those carried out on organisms, are invalid supports 
for modular theories of mental activity. 
Nevertheless, and however. much disagreement any one has with his 
particular strategies, it must be accepted that Shallice, 1988, is one of the 
most remarkable works dealing with the problem of brain modularity 

1 76 
Chapter 4 
and functional localization. I doubt if there is anyone in the literature of 
mental representation that presents as evenhanded and lucid a discussion 
of the arguments against specificity of function. All of us interested in 
this problem have at one time or another turned to his intelligent and 
comprehensive treatise for insight and wisdom about this problem area. 
Not only is the history of the problem laid out in much greater detail 
than I do here, but the alternative theories are tabulated in a way that 
suggests a significant level of appreciation on his part of the kinds of con­
ceptual difficulties for the modular approach raised in this chapter. 
Take, for example, Shallice's discussion of reductive uncertainty pro­
duced by system complexity. After tabulating and defining a variety of 
neural (or other) system organizations that can produce dissections into 
identical and indistinguishable sets of insoluble modules, he points out 
that it is impossible to choose between the different systems on the basis 
of the produced modules. However fundamental to many scientific and 
engineering enterprises, this conclusion is of course quite unpopular 
among those who hold to the specific representation or localization side 
of the argument and who assume, to the contrary, that the dissociation 
results determine a unique system organization. And here at least, un­
popularity seems to have trumped logic. 
By listing six different types of system organizations that could pro­
duce identical behavioral results even though they differ enormously in 
their internal structure, Shallice very effectively demonstrates the frailty 
of any conclusions that might be drawn about internal structure from be­
havioral findings. What he gives us is the physical instantiation of the ar­
gument that behavior is neutral with regard to internal structure. 
Although, it was apparently not his intent, Shallice's demonstration is 
also a powerful argument for a kind of psychological behaviorism based 
on the contention that the observed function of a system is indeterminate 
of its internal organization. 
To be more specific, let us consider the six functionally equivalent 
types of systems listed by Shallice ( 1988, pp. 249-253): 
1 .  Modular systems. The brain is organized into a cluster of semi-inde­
pendent, functionally specific modules that, when damaged, produce 
well-defined behavioral deficits. 
2. Coupled systems. The brain is composed of individual modules that 
strongly interact, but that each have their own specific functions. 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 77 
3. Systems having a continuous processing space. The brain appears to 
be representing specific functions which turn out to be simply different 
points on a continuum. 
4. Systems of overlapping processing regions. The brain is made up of 
overlapping pairs of modules, with both modules in each pair partially 
representing the particular function under investigation. 
5. Systems of semimodules. The brain is made up of strongly interacting 
modular regions, whose respective functions are really only statistical av­
erages of the many inputs that impinge on them. 
6. Distributed and multilevel systems. The brain is organized such that 
its functions are widely distributed at different vertical and horizontal 
levels. 
Shallice (1988) presents a particularly cogent and compelling argu­
ment that dissociation experiments purporting to distinguish between 
these alternative system types are deeply flawed: 
Precise measurements that directly reflect significant aspects of the functional or­
ganization of the cognitive system do not exist. Hence any empirical procedure 
that stands a reasonable chance of helping to uncover the functional characteris­
tics of the system is likely to involve as many assumptions as does the use of 
neuropsychological findings. (p. 265) 
And, speaking of a fallacious syllogistic argument in favor of the mod­
ular hypothesis, he says: '''If modules exist, then . . .  double dissociations 
are a relatively reliable way of uncovering them. Double dissociations do 
exist. Therefore modules exist.' Presented in this form the logical fallacy 
is obvious" (p. 248). Therefore, he continues: "So the idea that the exist­
ence of a double dissociation necessarily implies that the overall system 
has separable sub-components can no longer be taken for granted. 
(p. 249) 
Shallice goes on to quite correctly point out that the only way this ar­
gument can be made valid is to assume further that none of the other sys­
tems he has proposed would produce dissociations. As he says, "This 
additional assumption was never, to my knowledge, explicitly stated but 
it was easy to hold implicitly" (p. 248). Later, he provides what should 
be the conceptual nail in the coffin of a radical localization approach by 
characterizing this chain of logic as a chain of "lazy assumptions" 
(p. 248). 
Then comes a complete surprise! After so eloquently arguing that the 
techniques and methodology we have for establishing the existence of 

1 78 
Chapter 4 
mental modules are so deeply flawed that the quest may be an impossible 
one, Shallice ( 1988) pulls one of the most extraordinary intellectual flip­
flops since Watson's allusion to thinking as "implicit behavior" :  Stun­
ningly, he states: "From this stage on, these methodological cautions will 
be abandoned. In general, it will be assumed that a (double) dissociation 
signifies the existence of an isolable subsystem" (p. 266; emphasis 
added). 
How can this have happened? How could our hero suddenly have 
"abandoned" us? With characteristic lucidity, Shallice (1988) describes 
the nature of the thought process that made this defection possible for 
him: "Avoiding being deceived by a tempting shadow will be less impor­
tant than dimly making out the existence of some possible path" 
(p. 266). 
Shallice's hopeful, chimerical retreat from scientific rigor is probably 
all too typical of the localization enterprise, in which so many search for 
plausible relations between brain and mind ignoring serious warnings on 
the conceptual, technical, and methodological front that they may be on 
a fruitless quest. Their very likely wasted efforts are not the worst of it, 
however. Misdirection away from a valid understanding of the true na­
ture of brain organization may be a much more severe penalty for not 
heeding what scientific rigor and logic have to tell us. Given the brilliance 
of his analysis of the localization problem, Shallice's defection is, how­
ever, particularly disappointing. 
Others have also pointed out the dangers inherent in trying to analyze 
complex systems with what are essentially behavioral, or input-output, 
tools. Shallice's discussion ( 1 988) was essentially paralleled by Wimsatt 
( 1974), a philosopher who also appreciated that complex systems were 
capable of being segmented into many "different non-isomorphic de­
compositions" (p. 69). Citing Kauffman ( 1971 ) and Levins ( 1 966) on bi­
ological systems, Wimsatt agrees that "in complex systems, there are a 
number of possible decompositions and often no way of choosing be­
tween them" (p. 74). Clearly, Shallice's argument that many different 
types of system organizations can be decomposed into the same set of 
modules and Wimsatt's that any given complex system can be decom­
posed into many indistinguishable sets are simply variants of Moore's 
second theorem ( 1956). 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 79 
4.3.1 Dissociation Experiments Do Not Provide Proof of the Necessity 
or Sufficiency of Localized Function 
The basic conceptual tool of those seeking to correlate the activity pat­
terns in scanned brain images with particular psychological functions, 
the dissociation procedure, is relatively simple and seems convincing 
enough at first blush. Over the years, however, considerable criticism has 
been directed against even this apparently simple idea. We now consider 
that criticism in detail. 
Although the assumptions underlying the dissociation procedure are 
few, when we examine them closely, we can see they are surprisingly 
fragile. Chief among these assumptions are two: first, that the behavioral 
observations resulting from localization experiments are pure, that is, 
they represent "true" subdivisions of the cognitive ensemble; and second, 
that the subdivisions can be assayed and identified by the dissociation 
procedure. Several authors (e.g., Van Orden, Jan op de Haar, & Bosman, 
1997; Vishton, 1998) have argued that neither of these assumptions can 
be supported in a way sufficient to justify today's enormous research 
enterprise. 
Vishton ( 1 998) performs a useful service by clearly identifying the 
three principal types of dissociation experiments applied to the problem 
of brain localization in the past: 
Single dissociation. Damage to a particular region of the brain produces 
an identifiable behavioral deficit. 
Double dissociation. Damage to two different regions of the brain pro­
duces distinctly different behavioral deficits. 
Multiple dissociation. Damage to three or more regions of the brain pro­
duces distinctly different behavioral deficits. 
The fundamental logic of the dissociation argument thus goes something 
like this: if damage to a particular part or parts of the brain can be 
shown to produce a' particular psychological deficit (or deficits, then that 
or those part or parts can be assumed to be the locus of representation 
of that or those psychological process or processes. The double and mul­
tiple association procedures simply expand the logic of this basic 
paradigm. 
The problem with this seductively self-evident dissociation approach is 
that its subtleties are often ignored or overlooked. These subtleties come 

1 80 
Chapter 4 
in many flavors. First, in the single dissociation experiment, although 
damage to one area can be shown to produce some kind of a measurable 
deficit, it is not so easy to show that the particular lesion is sufficient by 
itself to instantiate the missing cognitive process. That is, it is entirely 
possible that the effect of an injury or even a well-positioned surgical in­
tervention might disrupt some behavior without being the "locus" of the 
cognitive process underlying that behavior-where the process resides or 
is represented. In a complex system, interaction of one region with a sec­
ond intervening region that controls a third, and truly critical region may 
release that third region from some excitatory or even inhibitory 
influence. The end effect would be to lead an investigator to completely 
misidentify the regions responsible for the resulting behavioral deficit. 
The problems, once again, are system complexity and the high degree 
of interconnectivity. Even the most committed "localizer" acknowledges 
that the brain, to whatever degree it may or may not be modular, is not 
organized a simple, serial chain of units. Thus, even though a correlation 
between a lesioned brain region and the diminution of some cognitive 
skill may be quite high, it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to 
make the next inferential step, namely, to conclude that that area is the 
locus of the mental process underlying the behavior. All that we can re­
ally say is that the lesioned region is involved in some way in the cogni­
tive behavior under study. 
Vishton ( 1 998, p. 8) raises this point eloquently: 
If the human brain consists of a collection of anatomically distinct modules, then 
isolated deficits should result from isolated patterns of brain injury. While the 
logic of this statement is beyond dispute, cognitive neuropsychologists must rea­
son in the opposite direction, from patterns of deficits to the architecture of brain 
organization. While damaging a modular system in a particular way will result in 
a single dissociation, damaging a non-modular system may produce single disso­
ciations as well. 
This statement, of course, conveys the same meaning as did many earlier 
arguments against modularity including those of Freud (1891) and 
Wood ( 1 978), and Shallice ( 1 988)-in particular, the second assumption 
Shallice asserts is required to make the dissociation argument work (see 
page 177). 
Vishton then goes on to point out that the same counterargument 
holds for the double and higher-order dissociation designs as well. No 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 81 
matter how many dissociations may be concatenated to prove a point, 
the direction of the logical chain through which the investigator must 
move (i.e., from the behavioral data to the neural organization) makes it 
logically, conceptually, mathematically, and computationally impossible 
to prove the desired point-that a particular place in the brain is the crit­
ical and sufficient locus of a particular psychological process. 
Others have made the same point-namely that double dissociations 
do not lead logically to modularity. Plaut ( 1 995) and Farah ( 1 994) have 
both argued, as did Wood ( 1978), from the point of view of computa­
tional modelers that disrupted connectionist systems (characterized by 
parallel distributed organization) are capable of producing exactly the 
same kind of results as lesioned localized systems. "The conclusion that 
the locality assumption may be false," writes Farah ( 1994, p. 60), "is 
a disheartening one. It undercuts much of the special appeal of 
neuropsychological dissociations as evidence about the functional 
architecture. " 
Plaut ( 1 995, p. 3 1 6) raises virtually the same caveat in discussing the 
results of the typical double dissociation procedure: 
[Because] random variations in quantitatively equivalent lesions would be ex­
pected to produce a distribution of effects . . .  the effects of individual lesions 
may not be representative of the distribution. 
This possibility raises concerns about the reliance in cognitive neuropsychol­
ogy on single case studies. [E]ffects that appear to provide insight into the func­
tional organization of the cognitive system may simply be statistical flukes. 
Although all of these studies are based on the results of computational 
modeling, and thus do not provide "killer" proof that the brain and cog­
nition are nonmodular, they do provide convincing arguments that the 
observations obtained using the double dissociation procedure are, in 
principle, neutral and should not be interpreted as definitive evidence of 
either modularity or nonmodularity. 
We have thus discovered yet another way to express the broad general­
ity that the observed behavior of a mental system may be neutral with re­
gard to its internal structure. Conclusions drawn from ignoring this 
caveat can be enormously misleading theoretically and can have serious 
practical consequences as well, particularly in the field of neuro­
psychology, which is so closely related to the treatment of human beings. 

1 82 
Chapter 4 
4.3.2 You can Find Anything You Name 
Other authors have joined the dispute about the data-processing meth­
ods and experimental procedures used to localize cognitive functions in 
the brain. Among the most concerned with the issue of what behavior 
can tell us about either cognitive or neural components is Guy Van 
Orden, my colleague at Arizona State University, and a group of his co­
workers. Van Orden et a1. ( 1 997), for example, present another cogent 
and compelling argument that it is not possible to go from effects (i.e., 
behavior) to structure (i.e., either cognitive components or neural struc­
tures). Indeed, the prevalent assumption throughout psychology that "ef­
fect = structure" leads to a fatal kind of illogic: 
The conclusion that the observed pattern of dissociations demonstrates autono­
mous or independent representations (single causes) simply affirms the inevitable 
consequent of assuming that there were autonomous representations in the first 
place . . . .  Thus we face an inescapable problem of circularity. Our goal is to in­
duce general cognitive components entailed in a specific task from observed be­
havior, but the method by which we induce these components requires reliable 
a priori knowledge of the self-same cognitive components. 
No theoretical approach escapes this problem. (p. 135) 
Vishton ( 1 998, p. 1 7) makes the same point from a slightly different 
point of view: 
If the brain is organized around location-specific, specialized functions, then lo­
calized, relative changes in activation will occur. To reason from localized rela­
tive changes in activation to localized specialized function, however, is to commit 
the logical error of affirmation of the consequent. 
When we recall the uncertain origins and transitory status of hypotheti­
cal cognitive or mental components discussed in chapter 3, it becomes 
clear that much of the foundation underlying the search for both cogni­
tive components and their respective neural modules is very fragile in­
deed. Logic and data alike suggest that these proposed "modules" more 
often than not are merely artifices emerging from our methods, our hy­
potheses, and our hopes about the way the mind-brain system might be 
constructed. 
Van Orden and his colleagues ( 1 997) join Shallice, Wimsatt, and many 
others in noting that there are many different system organizations that 
can produce the same kind of behavior a strictly modular system does 
and that they may not be distinguishable from it by any conceivable ex-
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 83 
perimental strategy. On the basis of logic and what we know about the 
brain-mind, would it not then be more accurate to describe it as a dy­
namic, self-organizing, recurrent, nonlinear, distributed system? Such a 
system would be composed of many heavily interconnected and interact­
ing subsystems (of various complexities) with feedback and feedforward 
signals passing among them in complex manners that are mathematically 
and empirically intractable. Nonlinear, interconnected, dynamic systems 
are fully capable of producing the kind of behavior expected from modu­
lar systems. Among the pieces of evidence that Van Orden and his col­
leagues ( 1997, pp. 155-160) (whose research vehicle is perception and 
language) cite to support this argument: 
1 .  Ziegler and Jacobs ( 1 995) and Stone, Vanhoy, and Van Orden (1997) 
found counterintuitive feedforward and feedback effects in letter search 
and lexical decision tasks, respectively. Such consistent feedforward and 
feedback effects were only predicted by an explanation based on 
bidirectional-nonlinear-flow of information between the visual stimu­
lus and the pronunciation. 
2. Tuller, Case, Ding, and Kelso ( 1 994) and Kelso et a1. ( 1 995) showed 
that, depending on the previous stimulus, there were two stable re­
sponses in some speech perception experiments in which a word was 
orally pronounced to a subject. This multistable type of response is also 
characteristic of nonlinear systems. 
3. Gilden, (in press) observed that lIf noise affected the recognition of 
words, contrary to the usual statistical notion of independence between 
trials. Because trials presented in sequence interacted in a demonstrably 
nonlinear way, the processing system involved could not be made up of 
causally independent modules. 
Van Orden et a1. ( 1997, p. 160) go on to conclude, on the basis of the 
complexity of dynamic cognitive systems displayed in these results, that 
they cannot be accessed in a way that would allow us to specify the na­
ture of any cognitive components even if they did actually exist: 
Dissociations cannot be trusted to isolate independent representations. The exist­
ence of plausible alternatives undermines their ability for reducing performance 
phenomena to single causes . . . .  Induction of single causes required a priori the 
truth of single causes. 
In a subsequent paper, Van Orden, Pennington, and Stone (in press, 
p. 5) have vigorously supported this point of view and summed up 

1 84 
Chapter 4 
some of the problems faced by the double dissociation technique. One 
of the most important contributions of this article was their expanded 
explication of the assumptions that are built into the double dissociation 
procedure. Mainly concerned with brain lesion associations, Van Orden 
and his colleagues point out some of the logical features of the double 
dissociation strategy. They challenge the implicit assumption that the 
effects of a lesion are really simple and "pure." That is, are the behav­
ioral deficits that arise from either an accidental or experimental brain 
injury independent of all of the other behaviors that might have been 
measured? Like Vishton ( 1998), Van Orden, Pennington, and Stone (in 
press) argue that they may not be-the problem is that independent 
validation does not exist. They say: "Whether dissociations are truly 
pure cases, and whether combinations of dissociations are truly opposite 
pure cases, cannot be determined outside of one's theories of mind and 
task." 
They also support the argument made by both Shall ice (1988) and 
Vishton ( 1 998) that there is an a priori requirement to assume the exist­
ence of modules before they can be sought in an experiment. Having 
made this assumption, then you can and always will find something to 
confirm it. The modules found are likely to be the modules hypothesized 
by whatever model or theory was initially invoked-even if it had been 
based on nothing more than ad hoc or unscientific origins. Thus, once 
again, the circularity of the double dissociation argument becomes clear. 
As is so often the case, the researcher ends up seeing what he expected 
and ignoring the data and arguments that do not fit into a preexisting 
theoretical structure. 
After extensively reviewing the literature on lexical processing, Van 
Orden et al. (in press) showed that, when examined from a point of view 
free of the usual assumptions underlying double dissociation theory, 
there were many experimental counterexamples to a purely modular hy­
pothesis. Conflating the a priori assumptions of the approach with a mo­
dicum of self-justifying data, they noted, simply leads to "fantasy 
components" (p. 3 1 ). The key problem is that the original theory, what­
ever its origins, arbitrates the acceptability of data and often dictates the 
conclusions-valid or not. Arguments then arise concerning exlusionary 
criteria and, given some leeway in accepting or rejecting particular 
findings, theories can become self-perpetuating. 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 85 
Because there is no way to exclude any but the most implausible hypo­
thetical components, there is an unending succession of ever more finely 
defined mental components: "Dissociation methods have no empirical 
failure point. Any new dissociations contrary to an extant modular the­
ory can always be accommodated by additional exclusionary criteria, by 
adding modules, or by replacing existing modules with more refined 
modules" (Van Orden et aI., in press, p. 24). 
The open-ended property of the dissociation technique that is empha­
sized by all of these commentators-Van Orden and his colleagues, 
Shallice, and Vishton-is a strong argument against applying this proce­
dure to both the search either for cognitive modules or for the localized 
brain sites representing cognitive functions derived from brain lesion 
studies. 
There is perhaps no more compelling argument that you can find 
whatever you seek by means of the brain imaging techniques than the 
strange story of the "God Spot." Speaking at a recent scientific meeting, 
one distinguished neuroscientist described the discovery of a region of 
the brain associated with accentuated religious experience in epileptics 
and deeply religious subjects. Although this report naturally produced a 
large number of comments in the popular literature, I have been unable 
to find a serious scientific report that spells out the details of the brain­
religiosity association. Nevertheless, the speed with which the idea that 
religious experience is built into our nervous system in a particular place 
slipped into the popular culture (e.g., see the websites authored by 
Connor, 1998; Trull, 1998; and Anonymous, 1998) suggests how easy it 
can be for even usually critical scientists to slide down the slippery slope 
toward a chimerical modularity. 
4.3.3 There Is Always a Peak of Response in a Scanned Image 
Van Orden and Paap ( 1997, p. S87) make another important point: 
"One cannot disconfirm false models, however, because subtractions 
always highlight some brain region." The reason for this is obvious when 
one thinks about it a bit. The subtraction process always produces a 
peak someplace at some level of the threshold control. If a peak is 
not visible at one criterion level, the threshold can be lowered until some 
difference value is accepted as a response. The subtraction process is 
never going to be perfect, no two real practical images are going to be 

1 86 
Chapter 4 
so perfectly matched that they produce exactly a zero difference. There­
fore, the difference map is never going to be perfectly flat. Rather, it is 
a difference between two uneven (for all practical purposes, quasi­
random) surfaces that must display some peaks that must be discernible 
at any reasonable level of threshold acceptance. Further, given the irregu­
larity of the typical scanned and bounded image, it is very likely, 
indeed it is almost certain, that one of these peaks will be larger than the 
others. 
The point is that a localized peak or maximum of activity in a brain 
scan almost always occurs even if the underlying forces producing the 
original maps were random or even partially random. The likelihood of 
not seeing some kind of a peak, especially in a system with widespread 
activation, is probably very small. Indeed, by depressing the threshold 
value at which a difference is accepted, an experimenter should be able 
to raise many more peaks from the background. What credibility can 
then be given to the largest one as a locus of some cognitive process given 
the arbitrariness of the decision criterion and the presence of other, pre­
viously hidden, peaks? 
If this informal argument is not adequate, my readers should also be 
reminded that mathematicians make the same point when they say that 
any bounded surface must have at least one maximum value. All images 
are bounded surfaces; ergo, all images must have a maximum or peak 
value. Given that a peak value is what is being sought when one attempts 
to localize some cognitive function, such a search is always rewarded. 
4.3.4 The Subtractive Method Also Does Not Provide Proof of the 
Necessity or Sufficiency of Localized Function 
Derived from the dissociation procedures used in neuropsychology and 
cognitive psychology, the subtractive method has some special attributes 
as a result of the specific technology involved in brain scanning. The 
method is based on two fundamental assumptions, the first of which is 
that brain activity should differ when two different cognitive processes 
are carried out. This is an incontestable truism at the micro neural level. 
It is necessary for any materialist monist to assume that two different 
thoughts are somewhere instantiated by different neural states, although 
the critical neural states may not be the ones we are observing or can 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 8 7  
observe. As Albert Einstein is reputed to have said, "Not everything 
that can be counted counts, and not everything that counts can be 
counted." 
However, there is a second, more complicated assumption, one that 
transcends such ontological certainties, that also deserves our attention. 
In its simplest form, it can be expressed as follows. Assume that an ex­
perimenter wishes to compare the brain effects produced by two cogni­
tive conditions. If one of the cognitive conditions involves some action 
that the other does not, then any difference in the brain responses ob­
served in the PET or fMRI image for those two cognitive conditions 
should indicate the region in which the action is localized. Therefore, for 
example, if in condition A a subject is performing a mental activity and 
in condition B the subject is not, then if one subtracts the image obtained 
in condition B from the one obtained in condition A, the common ele­
ments subtract out and the residual trace indicates where the mental ac­
tivity particular to condition A is localized. 
Stated in terms of these two assumptions, the method seems relatively 
straightforward. For example, consider the following gedanken­
experiment in which two fMRI images are reconstructed and then the 
first subtracted from the second. The first comes from a subject whose 
eyes are closed during the time the data necessary to reconstruct image 
were collected. The second comes from the same subject (ideally), with 
all conditions as close to the same as possible, except that the subject is 
visually active-looking at a picture of some object. Each of the fMRI 
images shows substantial amounts of brain activity-the subject is, after 
all, alive and mentally active in both instances. Nevertheless, the 
subtractive method makes the strong assumption that the two conditions 
differ only with regard to the presence or absence of the visual stimulus. 
The mathematics of the subtractive method here are trivially simple. 
The images are arrays of numerical values. Each pixel or voxel (in the 
case of a three-dimensional image) in each of the images has a certain nu­
merical value. Therefore, the two images can be numerically subtracted 
from each other in a very simple way-the value of a particular voxel in 
the first image is subtracted from the value of the corresponding voxel in 
the second image. When this is carried out over the entire image, a new 
difference image is generated. Regions whose activity does not change 

1 88 
Chapter 4 
should show a zero (or near-zero) value in the difference image; regions 
that are more active when the subject is actively doing something should 
show positive values; and regions that are less active should show nega­
tive values. Regions showing strong positive values in the difference im­
age are here assumed to be those responsible for the process of "seeing." 
These "positive difference" scores are thus considered by the localization 
practitioner to designate the neuroanatomical site of "seeing." 
Logically, the process is much less straightforward than the verbal 
description suggested. Even the strongest proponents of the imaging­
cognitive function correlation approach agree that the method is based 
on a string of assumptions that transcend the seeming simplicity of the 
arithmetic details just presented. Van Orden and Paap (1997, p. 586) 
highlight four critical assumptions that stand between the raw image 
data and the inferences and conclusions drawn from them: 
1 .  One must begin with a "true" theory of cognition's components . . . .  
2. [One must] assume that corresponding functional and anatomical 
modules exist in the brain. 
3. [T]he brain must be composed of feed forward modules to insure that 
the component of interest makes no qualitative changes "upstream" on 
the shared components of the experimental and control tasks. 
4. Finally, each contrasted task must invoke the minimum set of compo­
nents for successful task performance. 
"If any one of these assumptions is false," they go to say, "the entire en­
terprise fails" (p. 586). 
Given the unarguably critical nature of these assumptions, we need to 
examine each one carefully. First, do we have a "'true' theory of cogni­
tive components? "  Proceeding from the classificatory uncertainty about 
mental modules or faculties established in chapter 3, it would be prema­
ture, if not foolhardy, to assume that any '''true' theory" or logical tax­
onomy of mental processes exists. There is no consensus even on the 
existence and nature of the individual psychological components, facul­
ties, abilities, or modules, much less on how they may be organized or in­
teract. It should thus be extremely difficult to arrive at an integrated 
theory of how these hypothetical mental components are organized into 
functioning systems once one passes beyond the well-anchored sensory 
and motor subsystems. (I say "should" because unsubstantiated theories 
of this kind abound in the literature.) 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 89 
Second, are there direct correspondences between the proposed com­
ponents and their proposed locations in the brain? At first glance, this 
seems like a purely empirical question. One can simply go into the labo­
ratory and determine whether particular regions of the brain reliably 
"light up" in a image when a particular mental activity is present. 
However, the very act of asking this second question is based on 
an affirmative answer to our first question. If we cannot validly and reli­
ably identify a particular psychological component, we should see a 
wide variance in the active regions as different experimenters carry out 
what appear to be similar experiments. Indeed, this is the usual result 
(as we shall see in section 4.4, where the problem of "fragile data" is 
discussed). 
Although this second critical assumption of a correspondence between 
functional and anatomic modules is a sine qua non of the whole ap­
proach, it also cannot be uncritically accepted. This assumption in turn 
assumes a particular nature of the nervous system, one that is contraindi­
cated by the widespread activity observed in brain tissue whenever even 
the least significant cognitive process is carried out. The substantial over­
lap of the proposed cerebral regions also argues against it. Furthermore, 
it must not be overlooked that, before one image is subtracted from an­
other, the typical fMRI or PET scan shows near-universal activation of 
the cerebral cortex. It is only when the subtraction is carried out that a 
more or less sharply demarcated response is observed. The assumption 
that only this difference is significant and that all of the subtracted activ­
ity is irrelevant is another weak link in a highly questionable chain of 
logic. 
Third, is the brain a linear, feedforward only system, one that can be 
analyzed with the tools of linear mathematics and psychophysical assay 
procedures? Apart from localization studies, virtually every body of data 
on the brain and behavior suggests it is not, that there are strong feed­
back loops and that the nervous system, whether measured in terms of 
behavioral interactions or in terms of the interactions among the various 
centers and nuclei of the brain, is a highly complex and nonlinear system. 
Mental and neural processes, from the most basic chromatic experiences 
to the highest levels of cognitive penetration, clearly interact with each 
other. Furthermore, the behavior observed in virtually every cognitive ex­
periment is unstable; slight differences in experimental design often 

1 90 
Chapter 4 
produce qualitatively and catastrophically different results (Thom, 1975) 
in what are incorrectly assumed to be identical protocols. Even the most 
peripheral coding mechanisms produce coded signals that are typically 
nonlinear functions of the input stimulus. Reversible images produce cat­
astrophic reversals of perceptual experiences that would be hard to ex­
plain in linear terms. The course of learning is filled with sudden 
discontinuities such as insightful discovery, a phenomenon that suggests 
nonlinear interactions are the norm rather than the exception. 
How could this false hyperlinearization and oversimplification of the 
underlying model of brain localization have come about? Throughout 
the history of cognitive psychology, this new mentalism has been based 
on the idea of a simple, linear, mental system made up of isolable compo­
nents, which can be added and subtracted from each other without dis­
rupting their function. Simple "block diagram" models have been the 
conceptual mainstay of contemporary cognitive psychology. However, as 
Pachella (1974) has so eloquently pointed out, this particular model of 
the mind is based on premises and assumptions that require that the 
mind-brain be inherently linear and decomposable. If one starts off by 
accepting the premises that it is possible to isolate mental processes and 
that they act according to simple arithmetic rules, it is an easy step to 
searching for locales in the fabric of the brain in which these components 
could be localized. 
There have been many challenges to this linear, modular conceptual­
ization of the mind, but despite what appear to be strong counterargu­
ments, these ill-founded assumptions have uncritically become the basis 
of a major movement in contemporary cognitive neuroscience. 
Fourth and finally, is each experimental task for which a brain locale is 
sought simple enough that its components are really isolated from other 
equally simple tasks? In other words, is the psychological process under 
study pure, neither interacting with nor influencing other processes? 
Clearly, the assumption that any human cognitive component is 
uninfluenced by and independent of all others is hardly justifiable, given 
the evidence we have of the influence of set and expectations on even 
simple visual perceptual experience. 
The assumption of "functional isolability" is also counterindicated by 
the difficulty of identifying the base, neutral, or inactive condition that is 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 9 1  
being subtracted from the active condition in a dissociation or image 
subtraction procedure. For example, how can one isolate attention from 
a task in which the subject is supposed to be actively paying attention? 
How can one be assured that "attention is not being paid" to something? 
It seems unlikely that any conscious mental task would not involve atten­
tion to some degree. Can a subject, following the experimenter's instruc­
tions, truly not think about something? 
The issue of the baseline has been raised anew by Reiman et al. (2000). 
Given the rich variety of cognitive processes such as rehearsal, day­
dreaming, imaging, and other conscious and unconscious activities that 
may fleetingly be present in the brain, they ask, how can we be sure that 
two different experimental conditions do not activate common brain 
mechanisms (which would then be spuriously subtracted to "null" the 
relevance of some area)? Simple instructions to a subject-"Do not think 
about it" -represent a particularly fallible link in the chain of assump­
tions justifying the image subtraction approach to localizing mental 
functions in the brain. 
Roland et al. (1995) also call our attention to a very general method­
ological constraint concerning the subtractive method. Even if a subtrac­
tion shows that there is no difference in the blood flow and arguably, 
therefore, in the metabolism of a region, this is an integrated result and 
does not imply that the processing in the field was identical in the two conditions. 
Since every cortical field is probably anatomically connected to between 10 and 
20 other cortical areas (Felleman & Van Essen, 1991) one cannot from the mere 
localization and intensity of an activated field [in the brain] deduce what type of 
information transformation underlies that activation . . . .  (p. 783). Conversely a 
field presumably may also participate in identical information transformation 
but show a different intensity of activation depending on effects of attention [or 
some other variable]. (p. 783)5 
Here again, the confusion between what must be so at some level of 
psychoneural identity and what can be measured is clearly highlighted. 
5. It should be noted that even though Roland and his colleagues ( 1 995) are crit­
ical of some of the limitations of the averaging, standardization, and subtractive 
methods, they have been among the leaders in the localization field. Most of their 
work, however, is directed at sensory and learning topics for which the 
subtractive method is best adapted and for which there is the greatest degree of 
consistency with what has previously been discovered using other methods. 

1 92 
Chapter 4 
Thus it is not necessarily the case that the chain of iogic from ( 1 )  
changing information state to (2) increased neurophysiological activity 
to (3) accelerated metabolism to (4) increased oxygen uptake to (5) in­
creased blood flow to (6) image "hot spot" to (7) the presence or absence 
of a representation of the cognitive activity is unbroken and, therefore, 
sound. In addition to the logical distance between the primary represen­
tation and the distal measurement in this chain of logic, the meaning of 
each of the steps remains controversial. Thus there is no way to tell ex­
actly what even the most precisely defined "hot spot" means in the func­
tioning of a complex system of interacting brain modules and centers. 
Indeed, increased activity in an inhibitory area could as well be associ­
ated with a reduced level of the very cognitive activity under study. The 
hot spot could equally well indicate a region that actually diminishes that 
activity, which is being encoded in an increased negative score someplace 
else in the brain. As we have seen already, this impenetrability is charac­
teristic of nonlinear systems of many different kinds, any one of which 
can produce identical functional measures. 
Throughout virtually the entire localization enterprise, inadequate at­
tention is paid to the areas that show negative scores in the subtractive 
method (reflecting significantly decreased blood flow), whereas attention 
is heaped on regions that show high positive scores (reflecting sigifi­
cantly increased blood flow). The interaction of inhibitory and excitatory 
processes in the brain inevitably, therefore, can produce serious 
mislocalizations and mislead rather than enlighten us concerning any 
possible localization of mental processes. 
Inadequate attention is also paid to the regions that are "zeroed out" 
by the subtraction process. It is incorrect to assume, if region's function 
did not change drastically between the neutral and experimental condi­
tions, that its action has remained constant. It must not be forgotten that 
the true neural correlate of mental activity is not to be found at the molar 
level at which the PET and fMRI scans work. What is the correct level? 
Although no one yet has a convincing empirical answer to this question, 
it does seem most likely, given the overabundance of cellular neuro­
physiological data already available, that the true equivalent of what 
we behaviorally observe at the molar level as a result of conscious self­
awareness or mental activity is the information state of intricate 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 93 
networks of neurons. The localization issue-Where is that informa­
tional process occurring?-in fact, does not speak to this essential level. 
The point here is that the apparent cumulative activity of a brain locus 
may not change even though the state of the network in that region has 
been profoundly altered. 
Moreover, even if we could find precise modular locations in the brain 
associated with well-defined psychological constructs, we still would not 
have solved the problem of how brain activity becomes mental activity. 
That question has to be answered in terms of the informational state of 
the network of neurons, something that cannot be done for reasons of 
numerousness, complexity, chaotic loss of information, and thermo­
dynamic irreversibility (Uttal, 1998). 
Despite the cogency of this argument, practitioners of the imaging ap­
proach to functional localization in the brain continue to assume that the 
regions that are zeroed out by the subtraction process or that produce 
negative differences play little or no role in the psychological events be­
ing studied. It must be remembered, however, that substantial amounts 
of activity are present in these regions during both the control and exper­
imental data collection periods. A difference between the two experimen­
tal conditions need not signify that the small region illuminated in the 
subtraction image is the sole locus of the mental activity of interest. To 
assign even "simple" mental activities to a small localized portion of the 
brain runs counter to a substantial database suggesting that cognitive ac­
tivity of virtually any complexity produces widespread cerebral activity. 
There have been many other criticisms of the subtractive method as it 
is used in imaging experiments. In a particularly cogent argument, 
Pulvermiiller ( 1 999) details additional reasons that the subtractive 
method so used is logically flawed. According to him, it is the method's 
unproven simplifying assumptions that are fundamentally at fault. 
The single difference often assumed to exist between the experimental 
and control conditions in a fMRI experiment, Pulvermiiller ( 1 999) ex­
plains, may actually be a complex set of several differences. Paying atten­
tion to a visual stimulus presentation and observing a blank screen are 
tasks not likely to differ in only a single way. Clearly, this difficulty is 
compounded by our not having a clear sense of what different processes 
may be involved even in tasks as superficially simple as "looking" and 

1 94 
Chapter 4 
"not looking" at something. Thus there is no assurance that a "hot 
spot" in an fMRI image is actually the locus of what we think we are 
manipulating. 
It is sometimes argued that the subtractive method is but the first of a 
long line of new procedures that, with time, will overcome some of their 
attendant difficulties. For example, one of the most recently developed 
procedures, the event-related fMRI, requires much faster MRI systems 
than were previously available in order to measure the temporal course 
of the effect of a single event. Typically, two stimuli are repeatedly pre­
sented in random order and the resulting responses are averaged sepa­
rately for each of the two stimuli or conditions. For example, Friston 
et al. ( 1998) studied the different fMRI responses to familiar and unfa­
miliar visually presented words. The data were processed by various 
smoothing and normalization procedures and then the responses from 
each type of stimulus statistically combined and tested for significant dif­
ferences. The analysis is comparable to that used for visually evoked cor­
tical electrophysiological signals but has the advantage of specifying the 
spatial pattern of a brain response much more precisely. 
Although the event-related fMRI is a step forward from the much 
lower temporal discriminability of early fMRI procedures, it is subject to 
many of the same problems, particularly with regard to the averaging 
process, that plague evoked brain potential (EVBP) and other forms of 
MRI imaging. The advance in technology does not overcome the logical 
and conceptual problems all brain imaging techniques most ultimately 
confront. 
There is another point that is important in evaluating the results ob­
tained with either the subtractive method or event-related fMRI. Cumu­
lative neurophysiological activity, in this case measured by the metabolic 
activity of regions of the brain, is assumed to be associated with activa­
tion of a region that represents some psychological process. However, 
the link between the informational state of the neural network-the 
essential correlate of any cognitive activity-and cumulative metabolic 
activity remains uncertain. This raises, once again, a profoundly discon­
certing problem for the users of imaging procedures: the cumulative 
measure of brain metabolism is neither theoretically not empirically 
linked to the momentary details of the neural network at the micro 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 95 
level-the essential level of the information processing system that is re­
ally the psychoneural equivalent of mentation. From this point of view, 
the "signs" of brain activity obtained from the scanning systems are no 
more "codes" of what is going on than any other physiological correlate, 
such as the electrodermal response or an electromyogram. (For a discus­
sion of the distinction between signs and codes, see Uttal, 1967.) Al­
though localization studies may provide insights into and heuristics 
about how the brain is organized in a macroscopic fashion, it is the mi­
croscopic details of the ebb and flow of synaptic activity that are the 
psycho neural equivalent of mentation. 
4.3.5 Statistical Measures Sometimes Hide Individual Differences and 
Create False Localizations 
The data obtained from imaging procedures are usually very noisy. Al­
though there are many sources of this noise or uncontrolled variability, 
the main source is that individual brains differ significantly in the details 
of their functional organization and anatomy. Even some of the gross an­
atomical structures of the brain differ noticeably from one person to the 
next. With the exception of the major fissures, it is now thought that the 
complex sulcus and fissure pattern on the brain may be a random devel­
opment of the need during fetal development to squeeze a potentially 
large cerebral surface into the confines of the developing skull (see page 
30). On a more detailed level, neurosurgeons know that they must be 
very careful during their operations to individually map out the exact lo­
cation of cortical regions that may influence motor or speech; there is 
sufficient variability from one brain to the next that no "standard" map 
of a prototypical brain could be precise enough to avoid a surgically in­
duced disaster. Brain centers vary from place to place, sometimes by rela­
tively small amounts, but sometimes by amounts so large as to make the 
difference images produced by a fMRI or PET scan look very different 
from subject to subject. Superimposed on this anatomical intersubject 
variability are the many technical source of noise, metabolic, neurologi­
cal, electronic, and so on. 
Other sources of variability are less well appreciated. The extraordi­
nary adaptiveness of human thought processes is prima facie evidence 
that there are many ways in which the brain may arrive at a solution to a 

1 96 
Chapter 4 
cognitive problem. Thus the brain mechanisms operating at one instant 
may not be exactly like those at work the next. 
One strategy to handle the noisy data of imaging studies is to simply 
average several difference images pixel by pixel, that is, to add the nu­
merical value of each pixel in the images from one subject to the values 
of all of the corresponding pixels in all of the other images obtained from 
other subjects or from that same subject in other trials and then to divide 
the sums by the number of images processed. When these new values are 
plotted out in proper order they represent a kind of "average image" 
suggesting a more or less precise localization of the cognitive function 
that was under study. To reduce the variability produced by individual 
differences between subjects even further, the several difference images 
are sometimes standardized in size and shape before the averaging is car­
ried out, although this standardization can also degrade the very infor­
mation being sought. 
As Roland et al. ( 1 995) point out, the elaborate and extensive stan­
dardizing and averaging process often results in images still so noisy that 
contemporary researchers find it necessary to use even more sophisti­
cated processing tools. Some of these tools are comparable to the spatial 
frequency filters used to sharpen the original scans. Just how elaborate 
and extensive this manipulation of data can become is evident in the fol­
lowing account by Wise et al. (1991, p. 1 806) of their procedure in a typ­
ical experiment: 
The data from each subject were first standardized for brain size and shape and 
reconstructed parallel to the intercommissural line . . . .  To increase the ratio of 
signal to noise and to account for the normal variability of the anatomy of the ce­
rebral gyri and sulci between individuals, the reconstructed images were 
smoothed using a low pass filter of length 9 pixels on a side in the transaxial 
plane. As the study was designed to examine regional changes in blood flow 
across activation conditions, the data were first normalized for global flow differ­
ences by analysis of covariance, with measured global flow as the confounding 
covariate . . .  and the averaged for each condition across the six subjects . . . .  Sub­
sequent statistical analysis of the data to detect significant areas of change be­
tween task and rest were performed by a planned comparison of means with a 
Bonferroni correction at a P level of 0.05 accounting for the effective number of 
independent pixel measurements by analysis of the autocorrelation function of 
the images. 
Discussing the complex nature of these averages, transformations, and 
corrections performed in almost all currently active imaging laborato-
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 97 
ries, Roland et al. (1 995, p. 783) noted: "As a consequence, neither the 
extent of individual activations nor the extent of mean activations can be 
determined. However, it is possible to determine a center of each activa­
tion or a point where the change is maximal." 
The result of all of this correcting, noise reducing, standardizing, and 
averaging is that the final image obtained tends to obscure the sometimes 
very wide differences between different subjects. More seriously, it can 
produce the illusion of a localized process by emphasizing fortuitous re­
gions of overlap to the exclusion of the more widely distributed active re­
gions in the individual subject. 
There is considerable discussion in the statistical literature about how 
much "validity" is lost when averaging processes such as those discussed 
are carried out. As Pulvermiiller ( 1 999, p. 265) explains: 
If many comparisons are being made (when data from tens of channels or thou­
sands of voxels are contrasted) the likelihood of a difference occurring by chance 
is high. On the other hand, if critical significance levels are adjusted to reduce the 
likelihood of significant results . . .  an actual difference between brain responses 
may be masked because the too rigid statistical criterion is almost impossible to 
reach. 
An analogous issue concerns the criterion value that should be used. 
Although it is typical and traditional to use 0.05 as the cutoff point for 
psychological experiments, some investigators (e.g., E. Reiman of the 
Good Samaritan PET center in Phoenix, Arizona) prefer to use 0.005 to 
further minimize the possibility of a "false alarm" in their imaging stud­
ies, although this also means that some active areas will be "missed" that 
might well have shown up otherwise. 
Obviously, statistical considerations add to the uncertainty of the con­
clusions drawn from the data. Moreover, because of the limited avail­
ability of the scanning devices and the cost of this kind of research, the 
amount of data collected on specific problems is limited. Complete data 
sets sufficient to establish statistical significance are thus likely to be rare. 
4.3.6 Conceptual Contradictions Abound in the Imaging Literature 
One of the most disconcerting characteristics of the localization litera­
ture is how often conceptual and logical inconsistencies between the the­
ories and analyses coexist with a steadfast commitment to an empirical 
approach suffering from those very inconsistencies. I have already 

1 98 
Chapter 4 
spoken of the startling non sequitur between the data and concepts con­
traindicating a radical localization theory and Shallice's determination 
( 1 988) to forge ahead. 
The opposite kind of logical contradiction also occurs-collecting data 
based on an extreme view of localization and then drawing conclusions 
that run counter to it. For example, Posner and Raichle's enormously 
influential semipopular book ( 199411997) presents many examples of 
brain images purported to represent the localization of such complex 
cognitive processes as language, attention, imagery, and even mental dis­
orders. Nevertheless, in their concluding remarks they propose several 
general principles that run entirely counter to the "localized function" 
philosophy that permeates their book. Two of their ten general principles 
are particularly surprising: 
2. Cognitive tasks are performed by networks of widely distributed neu­
ral systems. 
3. Computations in a network interact by means of "reentrant" pro­
cesses. (p. 242) 
Indeed, given their championing of the idea that cognitive functions are 
highly localized, principle 2, arguing that wide distribution rather than 
localization is the true state of affairs, is more than just surprising. It con­
tradicts at the most fundamental level the message they are seeking 
to send as well as the central assumption of the entire localization 
enterprise. 
Similarly, principle 3 also runs strongly counter both to their conclu­
sions and to the assumptions on which the interpretations of their empir­
ical work are based. Essentially an affirmation of the nonlinearity of the 
brain system, principle 3 implicitly makes two important arguments 
against the use of the subtractive method: 
1 .  It contradicts the validity of the method's central assumption, that lin­
ear superimposition gives an accurate depiction of brain activity, thus as­
serting that the brain system is actually nonlinear and thus superimposi­
tion does not hold. 
2. It contradicts a corollary assumption of the subtractive method, 
namely, that cognitive functions are constant and unalterable.6 Reentry 
6. This corollary assumption, referred to as "pure insertion" by Sternberg 
( 1969a), has in fact been contradicted by a large amount of psychophysical evi-
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
1 99 
or feedback implies that the functions of the various regions involved in 
complex cognitive processes are not constant when these regions are in­
volved in different tasks or organized in different arrangements. 
Perhaps one of the most egregious conceptual errors of the localization 
enterprise is the assumption that the brain modules are able to encode 
only a single cognitive process. Throughout the fMRI literature there is 
an implicit acceptance of the assumption that, once associated with a 
particular cognitive process, a cortical module is irrevocably assigned to 
that process. Coupled with the continuing difficulty of defining cognitive 
processes, this assumption inevitably leads to false conclusions, theories, 
and explanations. 
To see how badly wrong things can go when this assumption is ac­
cepted let us return to a mainstay of current localization theory-"face 
recognition." We have already seen that electrophysiological (see page 
21) and imaging (see page 134) data have zeroed in on the fusiform cor­
tex as the locus of "face recognition." Upon further investigation, how­
ever, it turns out that, though this region may be deeply involved in some 
kind of visual image processing, there is nothing special about the face as 
a stimulus. Indeed, as Gauthier, Skudlarski, Gore, and Anderson (2000) 
are quick to point out, familiarity with cars and birds also tends to pro­
duce responses in this same area: "These results suggest that the level of 
categorization and expertise, rather than superficial properties of objects, 
determine the specialization of the [fusiform gyrus] (p. 1 9 1 ). 
The misidentification of fusiform gyrus as a "face recognition" region 
can, in retrospect, be attributed to two different, but intertwined, factors. 
The first is the inadequate definition of the cognitive process under inves­
tigation. Where once "face recognition" was sought, now something 
more generic-"familiarity"-seems to better characterize the process in 
which this area participates. The second is the profoundly incorrect as­
sumption that activity in this area of the brain accounts for an isolatable 
mental component that we could designate either as "face recognition" 
or as "familiarity." Indeed, when "expertise" can be substituted for a 
dence showing strong interactions between the attributes of cognitive activity 
(see, for example, Stoner and Albright, 1993). I have discussed the problems en­
gendered by assuming "pure insertion" and the arguments for assuming that 
interattribute interaction is the norm in Uttal, 1998. 

200 
Chapter 4 
particular kind of object recognition, it becomes clear that we must be 
far from the true organization of the brain-mind system. 
In summary, there appears to be a logical disconnect between the argu­
ments proposed by localization theorists and some of their conclusions. 
Likewise, there is a clash between their analyses and their empirical strat­
egies. Obviously, the seductive simplicity of the approach has won the 
day, pushing aside logic and even data, with many of the resulting theo­
ries driven more by hopeful expectations than by the findings and 
observations. 
4.4 Fragile and Contradictory Data 
Another problem faced by those seeking to localize cognitive processes in 
the brain is the fragility and transitoriness of the actual empirical data. 
We have already discussed some examples of this problem, but there are 
many others. In Uttal, 1988, I considered the matter of data fragility in 
considerable detail in the context of high-level visual cognition. From the 
plethora of studies of the cognitive processing of visual stimuli, it was 
very difficult to identify any kind of conclusion that lasted for more than 
a few years. Almost any replication came up with different results that 
differed either somewhat or completely from those of the original study. 
The slightest difference in experimental design, intended or unintended, 
could produce dramatic differences in the experimental outcome. Indeed, 
I posed this as a practical "law" asserting that "Slight changes in the pro­
cedure, stimulus materials, or methodology often produce dramatic 
changes in the rules of perception." (Uttal, 1988, p. 289) 
There are other indications in the localization literature that speak 
even more directly to the fragility of the raw database. Nothing makes 
this point more clearly than a figure prepared by Pulvermiiller (1999). 
Superimposed on a diagram of the human brain (figure 4.1 )  are the sev­
eral areas that have been designated by a number of investigators as the 
key region for the processing word meanings. The startling impression 
projected by this figure is that most of the major regions of the brain 
have been so designated by one or another of these investigators. 
Pulvermiiller helped to make this breadth of representation clear by la­
beling this figure with the names of the investigators who made these as-
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
201 
Figure 4.1 
. 
Areas identified by different laboratories using different methods to localize the 
processing of word meaning in the brain. Note that virtually all areas of the bram 
has been associated with word meaning. From Pulvermiiller 1999, used With the 
permission of Cambridge University Press. 
sociations (Epstein, 1999; Geschwind, 1970; Posner & DiGirolamo, 
1999; Salmelin, Helenius, & Kuukka, 1999; Skrandies, 1999; and Tranel 
& Damasio, 1999). 
Poepple ( 1 996) has also surveyed a group of studies on phonological 
processing and found essentially the same result. He reported, to the con­
trary, that there was little or no overlap in the activated brain regions 
even though all of the five studies he surveyed involved very similar cog­
nitive tasks. 
Harpaz (1999) reviewed over a hundred reports of PET and fMRI cor­
relations with cognitive functions published in 1997. He was particular 
interested in three aspects of replicability: ( 1 )  interexperimental replica­
tions-the frequency of one report being replicated by another; (2) 
intrasubject replications-going back to see if the same subject produced 
the same results when the experiment was repeated; and (3) intersubject 
replicability in the same study. With regard to ( 1 ), Harpaz states: 
In [ 1 1 6  of] the 125 studies I surveyed, there wasn't any report of a robust replica­
tion of the results of another study. [Other than nine studies] the rest of the 1 16 
studies either ignore completely the data of other studies, or compare It m qual­
tative terms, or compare the interpretation of the data (rather than the data It­
self). (p. 4) 

202 
Chapter 4 
And: 
The data about replication of cognitive imaging between different studies and 
different research groups is extremely sparse, and the sparse data is virtually all 
negative. (p. 7) 
Harpaz was equally critical of the individual experimental protocols 
that did not adequately check for intersubject or intrasubject variability. 
He states: 'The data about replicability between individual subjects in the 
same study is also very sparse. It contains a single case of what looks like 
robust replicability . . .  but the rest is mostly negative" (p. 7). Given how 
few metastudies of this kind have been carried out, Harpaz is to be given 
a great deal of credit. (Readers interested in reasons for this paucity of 
meta reviews should consult appendix B.) 
Another convincing and dramatic demonstration of one of the main 
sources of "fragile data" can be found in the previously cited work of 
Grafman et al. (1995), whose list of cognitive processes associated with 
the frontal cortex spans over seven pages. Obviously, either investigators 
have discovered a region of the brain that is involved in everything (a real 
possibility) or their idiosyncratic definition of psychological processes 
is much too varied. If the latter, this is prima facie evidence of a break­
down in a systematic definition of psychological processes. If the former, 
what better argument could be made against even a limited form of 
localization? 
Another way in which the data may be "fragile" can be observed in the 
inconsistencies among the conclusions drawn from the application of dif­
ferent tools. For example, PET studies of memory formation indicate 
that both the anterior and posterior portions of the parahippocampal 
gyrus are involved in memory encoding and storage. Quite to the con­
trary, however, fMRI studies of the same tasks by Schachter and Wagner 
( 1 999) indicate that only the posterior region is activated. Such 
conflicting results, the authors speculate, "could reflect differences in ex­
perimental protocols between the studies, or could be attributable to loss 
of fMRI signal (susceptibility artifact) in the anterior MTL" (p. 1504). 
The possibility of some even more deeply flawed conceptual artifact can­
not be excluded. A simple admonition that "further experiments" are 
needed is inadequate in the absence of a thoughtful consideration of the 
fundamental premises on which this type of research is based. 
Technical and Conceptual Problems 
203 
The important point made by all of these demonstrations of wide­
spread activity in imaging studies is not that there has been any error on 
the part of most of these investigators, but rather that they all are likely 
to be correct. The slight differences that are inevitable in the experimen­
tal paradigm used by each laboratory probably led their measuring tech­
niques to emphasize different parts of what are actually complex and 
widely distributed brain processes. The inescapable conclusion, notwith­
standing the variability and fragility of all these data, is that broad distri­
bution and interaction among multiple regions of the brain are the true 
attributes of the representation of mental activity. 
4.5 Conclusion 
In this chapter, I have examined some of the anatomical, physiological, 
technical, logical, and data difficulties that should caution against any 
premature acceptance of a simple theory linking hypothetical compo­
nents of mental activity with precisely circumscribed brain locations. The 
desire to find neat answers to some of the most profound questions of 
human existence may have primed us to accept what is actually a highly 
flawed theory of the way in which the human mind is instantiated in neu­
ral tissue. The problem is that correlative studies of imaging and cogni­
tion are based on a set of tenuous and possibly (perhaps probably) 
incorrect assumptions of the relationships between behavior, mental ac­
tivity, and brain activity. Setting aside for the moment the problem of the 
accessibility of mental activity by means of behavioral analyses, support­
ers of localization hold it as axiomatic that both the brain and the mind 
consist of analyzable, isolable, independent units interacting within the 
confines of a linear system. There are many corollaries of this central ax­
iom including the notion that brain images can be superimposed in a lin­
ear fashion, that the hypothetical cognitive and brain modules are 
"purely insertable," and that the mental components can be assigned, at 
least to some degree, to specific brain locales. Although supporters of lo­
calization implicitly accept these and related fundamental assumptions, 
each of assumptions is fraught with uncertainty and most have been 
challenged at one time or another on both theoretical and empirical 
grounds. Collectively, the corpus of studies challenging much of the 

204 
Chapter 4 
recent work on brain localization suggests that its "conclusions" are un­
tenable and, even worse, misleading. 
Why should this be? Pointing out that both the strategies and the ob­
jects of science evolve, Ashby ( 1 960, p. 5) said: 
Science stands today on something of a divide. For two centuries it has been ex­
ploring systems that are either intrinsically simple or that are capable of being 
analyzed into simple components. The fact that such a dogma as "vary the fac­
tors one at a time" could be accepted for a century shows that scientists were 
largely concerned in investigating such systems as allowed this method. [How­
ever,) this method is often fundamentally impossible in complex systems. 
Perhaps, today the classic approach of science to segment and isolate is 
not appropriate for the kinds of brain-mind systems we are studying. 
Rest assured, this is not a unique problem for the cognitive 
neurosciences. Even in physics, there are analogous constraints at work. 
No one has been able to deterministically solve the three-body problem. 
Yet cognitive neuroscientists relentlessly pursue a task of even greater 
complexity and intractability. 
An alternative, and perhaps more realistic, point of view to the notion 
of isolatable cognitive-neural modules postulates a complex mind-brain 
system instantiated as a unified entity in which the various parts interact 
too strongly to be isolated. That they cannot be isolated from each other 
has to do with their fundamental nonlinear nature and heavy intercon­
nectedness and not with inadequate research tools or incomplete data. In 
the final chapter of this book, the nature of this alternative point of view 
is considered in detail. 
5 
Summary and Conclusions 
This book has identified and discussed some of the fundamental assump­
tions that underlie both historical and current efforts to localize psycho­
logical processes in particular regions of the brain. It is offered as a 
critique of an increasingly popular strategy to bridge the databases of 
cognitive psychology and the neurosciences. The thesis presented here is 
that much of the "localization" research effort, now and in the past, has 
been based on assumptions that are demonstrably incorrect or that can­
not be validated either in principle or in practice. This book is presented 
with the understanding that the problems, issues, and questions it has 
dealt with are some of the most important and most challenging conun­
drums facing science. 
We have seen that the controlling assumption of the cognitive localiza­
tion enterprise is that mental processes are analyzable into distinct and 
separable modules, components, or faculties and that localized brain re­
gions instantiate these processes. It is this unproven and often-contra­
dicted assumption, taken as an axiom, that seems to be the central 
weakness in this enterprise. My goal has been to add one more voice to 
those arguing for reconsideration and reexamination of the conceptual 
and technical assumptions underlying localization research, particularly 
current efforts that use the powerful new imaging techniques. 
This book has also been a study of the epistemological constraints on 
our efforts to determine the relationship between the brain and the mind. 
There exist, it has argued, certain well-defined limits on our ability to 
bridge the gap between psychological and neurophysiological findings. It 
is my conviction that the attractiveness of the new imaging technologies 
and the unremitting urge to answer some of the most profound questions 

206 
Chapter 5 
of human existence have led many of my colleagues to make serious 
misestimates concerning the nature of these limits. 
One other general goal of this book has been to champion the resurrec­
tion of an underappreciated, yet scientifically sounder, approach to the 
study of psychological processes-behaviorism. My critique of localiza­
tion, along with my arguments against reductionism (Uttal, 1 998) and 
accessibility (Uttal, 2000a), if well founded, support an argument for a 
major change in the prevailing zeitgeist of experimental psychology. 
Whereas the cognitive school has been predominant in recent years, it 
seems to me that a new look at some kind of a modernized and revised 
behaviorism is in order. Even though the older classical versions of be­
haviorism were disappointing and inadequate to many of us, I believe 
that some of the fundamental premises of the behaviorist approach 
to the study of psychological activity merit review and, perhaps, 
readoption. 
Behaviorism was accused of everything from "inhumanness" to 
"hyperempiricism" to "irrelevance" to being "antireligious." My review 
of behaviorism (Uttal, 2000a) unequivocally demonstrated that criti­
cisms of the behaviorist approach to psychological science went far be­
yond its actual tenets and assumptions. My frank expectation, therefore, 
is that many of the changes that I would like to see for experimental psy­
chology are unlikely to ever be achieved. There is too much vested inter­
est and too little consideration of the truly essential and fundamental 
assumptions to make revolutionary changes in the current consensus 
likely. Nevertheless, before proceeding further with my final chapter, I 
feel it necessary to identify and repudiate, as clearly as I can, some of the 
false issues that may be imputed to this book. 
First, my analysis of the effort to bridge psychological and neuro­
physiological or neuroanatomic data is not intended in any way to 
challenge the most basic principle of psychobiology or the cognitive 
neurosciences, namely, that any human mental process is solely a 
reflection of or equivalent to some aspect of brain activity. 
Whatever the actual relation is between the brain and mental activity, 
and however difficult it may be to unravel that relationship, this book is 
in no way intended to support the notion that some kind of a dualist (or 
pluralist) ontology underlies organic thought. Nothing I have said here 
Summary and Conclusions 
207 
should be taken to imply anything other than the common reality of both 
brain and mind-one as mechanism and the other as function of that 
mechanism. Without this principle, all else in neuroscience and psychol­
ogy is nonsense. 
There is no goal motivating my work other than to energize the scien­
tific search for understanding the true nature of the mind-brain relation­
ship. I share the goal of an objective search for this understanding with 
many others, regardless of our points of view. I certainly do not hold that 
any identified epistemological limits constraining research in this field 
can or should be used as grounds for revising or "reconstructing" the sci­
entific method. All of us, behaviorists and cognitivists alike, stand to­
gether or this issue. 
Second, the analysis presented in this book is aimed at a better under­
standing of the localization issue, per se, and no other. The macroscopic 
question of where a process may be occurring in the brain is only one of 
several neuroreductionist issues that confront psychobiologists. How­
ever much we may learn (or not learn) about how the brain activity un­
derlying mental activity is localized, this information is incapable of 
providing any fundamental insight into the primary question of 
psychoneural equivalence, that is, how mental activity is represented or 
encoded in the brain. An analysis of the quest to answer this primary 
question, the effort to determine the microscopic details of the brain, 
which represents a different kind of neuroreductionism, was the target of 
my earlier work (Uttal, 1998), where I argued that it, too, is probably 
unachievable. 
Third, although studies of the dynamics of learning and memory may 
help us understand something about the localization problem, the actual 
transformations involved in learning and memory are also manifesta­
tions at a more microscopic level of analysis than the one addressed by 
the localization enterprise-and the one with which this book has been 
concerned. One important contribution that physiological studies of 
learning and memory do make, however, is to support the idea of the dis­
tributed involvement of many brain centers and nuclei in these two as­
pects of cognitive information processing. 
Fourth, this critique of localization research is not intended to put a 
stop to additional research and to whatever understanding can be 

208 
Chapter 5 
achieved by that research. I am not suggesting that the tools of the 
neurophysiologist, the neuroanatomist, or the psychologist be laid aside 
and no further research be done in each of these exciting, fruitful, and 
even elegant fields of inquiry. Each approach to understanding offers 
much in its own right and can be expected to provide both practical and 
theoretical concepts and procedures that may better the human condi­
tion or deepen our understanding of who and what we are. The difficulty 
is that, all too often, what is offered as "progress" may actually be mis­
leading-misdirecting our attention and energies away from whatever it 
is that we will ultimately consider to be the "truth" about ourselves. This 
may be especially true for studies that attempt to build illogical bridges 
between the findings of different sciences. It is the attempt to build such 
bridges that I challenge. Imaginative, but erroneous, neuroreductive 
bridges between the different domains may cause more damage than a 
realistic appreciation of the barriers to building those bridges. 
Nor am I suggesting that the wonderful scanning devices I have de­
scribed are not extraordinarily useful in many other kinds of application. 
The power brought by the scanning systems to study the anatomy and 
physiology of the brain is profound. Whole new areas of medical treat­
ment are now available that were unimaginable only a few years ago. 
The relief from pain and suffering that these devices have already pro­
vided makes them one of the most important scientific developments of 
all time. As a colleague once said to me, "Would you deny the use of 
fMRI to the brain surgeon who was about to perform surgery on you?" 
The answer, of course, is-of course not! 
These wonderful machines are not omnipotent, however, and one of 
the places where their application has run ahead of a thoughtful and rig­
orous analysis is in localizing notoriously ill-defined mental activities in 
what may be nonexistent modules of the brain. 
Fifth, this book is not intended to reject all aspects of the localization 
of mental processes. The domains in which these ideas work are well 
enough established and almost universally accepted: they are the sensory 
input channels and their respective receiving areas and the motor regions 
and output pathways of the brain. A considerable amount of PET and 
fMRI localization research has simply confirmed some things that we 
have long known. Muller's law on the specific energy of nerves remains 
Summary and Conclusions 
209 
as valid today as when it was first enunciated in 1 840. The regions sub­
serving the great sensory modalities and the motor output portions of the 
brain are highly structured and localized even in light of newer informa­
tion that suggests that these regions may also have other functions. Cur­
rently, we are discovering new information that takes Muller's law from 
the level of the great modalities and applies it to the action of single neu­
rons-but, again, only in the sensory transmission pathways and pri­
mary receiving areas for each modality. Even within a modality such as 
vision, some spatial encoding (not inconsistent with localization of func­
tion) is known for different dimensions or attributes of the visual stimu­
lus. In some cases, we have even been successful in decoding the exact 
nature of the language used by the afferent or efferent pathways to con­
duct patterns of stimuli or responses into and out of the central nervous 
system. However, because more complex functions recruit ever larger 
portions of the cerebral cortex during their activation, an equivalently 
narrow localization or "decoding" of cognitive functions seems to be far 
less likely. 
Therefore, even though I have argued here against the radical localiza­
tion ideas that permeate this field of science, I am not arguing for any 
kind of Lashley-like mass action or equipotentiality. There is ample evi­
dence that the central nervous system is not homogeneous and does have 
specialized regions and functions. The case for the existence of spe­
cifically tuned motor and sensory regions (notwithstanding their other 
overlapping functions) is unassailable. The physical anchors available 
for defining stimuli and responses in these regions simply do not exist 
for the vaguely defined cognitive processes that researchers, so often 
inappropriately, seek to localize in the brain. Clearly, it is the complexity 
and nonlinearity of the interactions among the regions of the brain that 
is the source of the difficulty in this broader field of research. Unfortu­
nately, successes that have been enjoyed in the periphery have sometimes 
misled us to think that more complex, central processes are equally ame­
nable to analysis. My argument is with the extrapolation from the ac­
ceptable concept of well demonstrated input-output functions to the 
unacceptable idea that much less well defined "higher-order" cognitive 
constructs (vaguely defined and lacking physical anchors) are equally 
well localized. 

2 1 0  
Chapter 5 
Sixth, because of the multidimensional complexity of the brain and its 
processes, I believe that the localization effort is fraught with difficulties 
that do not obtain in other reductionist efforts. This book is thus not an 
attack on reductionism in general,l Indeed, reductionism has worked 
well enough in some spheres of science. One cannot help but admire the 
progress made on the essentially one-dimensional problem encountered 
when studying the genome of various organisms or on the two-dimen­
sional problem encountered in the simulation of a human chess player. 
However, when science confronts three-dimensional, nonlinear systems 
with very large numbers of components and much more complex rules of 
interaction, even those much simpler than the brain (e.g., gravitational 
interaction of three bodies or the solar system), the situation is qualita­
tively different. Simply put, some of the concepts and strategies that 
work in lower-dimensional worlds may not be applied to the more com­
plex ones. Koch and Laurent ( 1 999, p. 98) put it very well: 
Any realistic notion of brain complexity must incorporate, first, the highly non­
linear, nonstationary, and adaptive nature of the neuronal elements themselves 
and, second, their nonhomogeneous and massive parallel patterns of intercon­
nection whose "weights" can wax and wane across multiple time scales in 
behaviorally significant ways. For now, perhaps the most obvious thing to say 
about brain function from a "complex system" perspective is that continued 
reductionism and atomization will probably not, on its own, lead to fundamental 
understanding. 
Seventh, the caveats raised here about the future of psychological sci­
ence are not intended as grounds for pessimism, but as necessary cau­
tions, to be evaluated on their scientific merits. Many other sciences 
confront their limits and boundaries and not only live with them but are 
stimulated to deeper understanding by them. Psychology must do the 
same. A mature understanding of its limits may well lead to a more fruit­
ful and psychobiologically valid future-far sooner than any understand-
1. It should be noted, however, that some other simpler sciences are not immune 
to some of the criticisms made here of neuroreductionism. The increasing appre­
ciation of complexity and the limits it may place on reductionism has become a 
hot topic for scientists in many fields of endeavor. Gallagher and Appenzellar 
(1999) have collected a number of articles dealing with the implications of sys­
tem complexity on potential efforts to "reduce" such systems to the language of 
more basic units. 
Summary and Conclusions 
21 1 
ing based on a chimerical search for a neuroreductionist never-never 
land. 
Eighth, this book is not intended to suggest either that the current situ­
ation in experimental psychology is unremittingly dismal or that research 
efforts there are totally misdirected. Notwithstanding any suggestions to 
the contrary, changes are occurring in experimental psychology that sug­
gest that "barefoot" neuroreductionism is not as prevalent as it was even 
quite recently. Many journals, particularly in the field of perception, in 
which allusions to any available kind of neurophysiological data, how­
ever remote their connection to the work at hand might actually be, were 
rampant only a few years ago, have now assumed a much less reductive 
tone. Many of the problems faced in this field are not due to the labora­
tory scientists who often carefully qualify the implications of their scien­
tific discoveries, but rather to "bridging" psychobiologists, who are 
prone to read too much into the difficult imaging and physiological data 
and to practitioners, even more remote from the laboratory, who are 
sometimes guilty of far wilder extrapolations. No better example of this 
is the nonsensical "left brain-right brain" tutoring mythology that has 
crept into our public education. 
Ninth and finally, this book makes no attempt to unravel the logical 
and linguistic difficulties of defining mental terms. Indeed, failure to 
clearly define such terms is the most glaring weakness of the entire local­
ization enterprise. If anything, chapter 3 makes it clear that there is 
little agreement and an abundant opportunity for controversy concern­
ing the nature of the mental processes for which brain localizations 
are sought. Any time anyone has made an effort to define mental activi­
ties, it has produced only circularity and vagueness. This is probably 
also true for any subsequent effort to develop a taxonomic organization 
of mental processes. I use the mentalist vocabulary as it is, but with 
the understanding that each "mental" term may have some different 
connotation or denotation to others or seem to have some consensual 
meaning where, in fact, there is none. The disturbing aspect of the situa­
tion is that in even in the glaringly bright light of the circularity and 
uncertainty associated with cognitive terminology, our science has 
such a strong proclivity to make such heroic efforts to localize these 
phantoms! 

2 1 2  
Chapter 5 
This final chapter is intended to summarize many of the points brought 
out in the previous chapters, to set forth the explicit and to tease out the 
hidden assumptions of the localization theorists' approach, and to com­
pare and contrast these assumptions with a set of counterassumptions in­
tended to convey what I consider to be the salient and fundamental 
principles of the brain-mind relationship. 
5.1 The Implicit and Explicit Assumptions of Localization Research 
Contemporary efforts to localize psychological functions in specific re­
gions of the brain, particularly when applying the imaging tools, are 
based on a string of assumptions, many of which are controversial and 
some of which are demonstrably wrong. Nevertheless, if we are to un­
derstand both the strengths and weaknesses of this enterprise, it is neces­
sary to define these fundamental assumptions as specifically as possible. 
The following assumptions2 collectively make up the chain of logic un­
derlying virtually all variants of the localization hypothesis: 
1 .  Cognitive processes can be defined and exclusively denoted in precise 
terms. 
2. Cognitive processes are accessible to experimental assay and exami­
nation. 
3. Cognition is actually made up of a collection of quasi-independent 
modules or faculties. 
4. Cognition can be analyzed by appropriate techniques; that is, it can 
be decomposed into components that can be examined independently. 
5. These components can be used to guide empirical studies. 
6. The cognitive modules, components, or faculties including high-level 
cognitive processes such as speech, reading, "executive decision mak­
ing," and perception can be localized in the particular places in the brain. 
7. The double dissociation procedure is an effective means of identifying 
and localizing individual cognitive components. 
8. The brain is a nonhomogeneous organ with many regions specialized 
for different cognitive functions. 
2. Inclusion on this list does not necessarily mean that the assumption is 
"wrong." Indeed, some of the assumptions in this list may also appear in the 
"antilocalization" list in section 5 .2. It is the entire logical chain that is being 
considered in this summary. 
Summary and Conclusions 
213 
9. These brain regions are discrete and stable and relatively constant in 
location from person to person and from time to time. 
10. Although these brain regions may interact with other areas, their re­
spective functions can be determined. 
1 1 .  The brain regions purported to represent or control the cognitive 
functions can be identified by surgical, electrophysiological, and 
tomographic techniques. 
12. The intrinsic or association (i.e., nonsensory and nonmotor) areas of 
the cortex are where cognitive processes are represented or encoded. 
13. The localized regions representing cognitive functions can be spe­
cifically identified by the changes in their metabolism-either oxygen use 
or glucose consumption-that are assumed to occur when these regions 
carry out different cognitive processes. 
14. Increased cognitive activity is associated with increased neural activ­
ity. 
15. Active neurons have higher metabolic rates than inactive ones. 
16. Localized metabolic rate changes are highly correlated with blood 
flow during activation of one of the cognitive modules. 
17. Brain processes interact in simple ways and can be, to a valid first 
approximation, described collectively as a linear system by superposition 
and other arithmetic procedures, as well as by statistical analyses. 
18. The location of brain regions associated with particular cognitive 
processes is sufficiently stable in time and space so that experiments can 
be replicated. 
19. The location of brain regions associated with a particular cogni­
tive processes is sufficiently constant from person to person that the 
data from individuals may be pooled to produce precise estimates of 
localization. 
20. Dissociation experiments are a powerful and effective tool for asso­
ciating a brain region with a cognitive process. 
21. The subtractive method is a powerful and effective procedure for ob­
serving the differences in brain response between experimental and con­
trol conditions. If an image obtained from a condition in which a cogni­
tive process was not activated is subtracted from one in which it is 
activated, the difference image will be an indication of just the regions 
that are associated with the activation of the process-other irrelevant, 
noisy, or common information is arithmetically cancelled out. 
22. Regions that show positive differences in subtracted images (activa­
tions) indicate real peaks of brain metabolism. 

2 1 4  
Chapter 5 
23. Regions that show increased activation in experimental (as opposed 
to control) conditions are associated with he corresponding activation of 
particular cognitive processes. 
24. Regions of decreased activation are unimportant or irrelevant. 
25. Selective behavioral deficits produced by brain lesions and studied 
by neuropsychologists are sufficiently stable, specific, and replicable to 
support hypotheses of highly localized mental functions. 
26. The various averaging, smoothing, and normalizing transformations 
applied to scanning images do not distort the final outcome of an experi­
ment or the conclusions to be drawn from it. 
27. The localization of a cognitive process utilizes existing theories and 
hypothetical cognitive components. This is required to guide our search 
for the brain region in which the proposed cognitive components may be 
localized. 
28. The findings obtained at the gross level of cerebral organization by 
localization studies "explain" some aspects of cognitive activity. This is 
the level of psychoneural equivalence and a valid statement of cognitive 
neuroreduction. 
29. The main conclusion to be drawn from this chain of logic and the 
findings it produces is that there exists a high degree of specific and local­
ized representation of cognitive processes. 
5.2 Some Counterassumptions: A Behaviorist View 
The opposing, behaviorist point of view, collectively represented by the 
following, often antagonistic, counterassumptions argues that, in the 
main, the localization of high-level cognitive functions in specific regions 
of the brain is not achievable. It argues further that efforts to achieve 
such cognitive localization, however seductive and straightforward it 
may seem to be, are seriously misleading our quest to understand how 
cognitive processes are represented by the brain. 
1 .  Even the simplest cognitive process is of enormous informational 
complexity, involving perception, memory, decision making, emotion, 
set, and virtually any other mental activity invoked by mentalist psychol­
ogists. 
2. There is a vast amount of "cognitive penetration" in which the state 
of the organism alters the nature of a response. This cognitive penetra­
tion suggests widespread involvement of parts of the brain of which we 
know very little in even the simplest kind of cognitive activity. 
Summary and Conclusions 
2 1 5  
3. Cognitive processes, particularly the more complex ones, are in large 
part indivisible and unitary. They cannot be analyzed into components, 
modules, or faculties because of the very strong interactions between 
what may only be apparently different aspects of cognition. 
4. It is extremely difficulty to define cognitive components in a way that 
is commensurate with any kind of psychobiological reality. 
5. Cognitive processes are inferences (i.e., post hoc explanations or hy­
pothetical constructs) intended to provide explanations of the underlying 
mechanisms that account for the complexities of observed behavior. 
6. Cognitive activity cannot be examined directly; it is largely inacces­
sible. 
7. Observed behavior and verbal reports are neutral concerning the ac­
tual nature of the underlying cognitive processes or cognitive activity. 
8. Computational and mathematical models are neutral concerning the 
actual nature of the underlying cognitive processes. 
9. Neurophysiological findings, because of their complexity at the essen­
tial neural net level, cannot be analyzed in a way that permits a recon­
struction of cognitive processes. 
10. The reality of cognitive faculties, modules, or components of all 
kinds depends on a set of assumptions that is impossible to confirm. No 
widely accepted taxonomy or lexicon of cognitive processes exists or is 
on the intellectual horizon. 
1 1 .  There are strong practical, social, human, humane, and conceptual 
forces that drive us, incorrectly, into accepting the reality of reducible 
and accessible components of mental activity. 
12. The brain is not homogeneous and can be divided into sensory, mo­
tor, and association regions with different functions by many different 
methods and procedures. 
13. Identifiable brain regions overlap, are redundant, and may also be 
multifunctional in a way that adds to their complexity. Thus the brain is 
spatially uncertain. 
14. The brain is also a dynamic system, its activity changing as a result 
of experience, recovery of function, the passage of time, and perhaps also 
as a result of alternative tasks or strategies. Because of its continuous on­
going activity, it is likely that it constantly reorganizes itself in a normal 
course of events. Thus the brain is temporally uncertain. 
15. It is very difficult to determine narrowly defined and independent 
functions of the so-called intrinsic or association areas of the brain. 
16. The main reason for this difficulty is the high degree of interconnec­
tion of different functional regions. Thus, however profoundly stimula-

2 1 6  
Chapter 5 
tion or lesioning of a particular area may affect some process (e.g., 
speech), the mechanism of the alteration or deficit is never exactly clear. 
17. Neuropsychological studies in human beings are idiosyncratic, anec­
dotal, and of only marginal value in unraveling the organization of the 
brain-mind. 
1 8. Although necessity is easy to demonstrate, sufficiency is extremely 
difficult to define in a system as complex as is the brain. Furthermore, a 
determination of necessity is inadequate as an argument for localized 
function. 
1 9. The brain is a nonlinear system, to which the tools of linear mathe­
matics do not apply. 
20. Extensive parts of the so-called association area, and, increasingly, 
of the sensory and motor regions and even of the cerebellum are now 
thought to be involved in cognitive activity. 
21. The greater the complexity of information processing, the broader 
the distribution of cerebral centers recruited to take part in the process­
mg. 
22. The double dissociation procedure is deeply flawed, potentially mis­
leading, and based on unjustified a priori assumptions. 
23. The subtractive method is a deeply flawed and potentially mislead­
ing procedure that can potentially distort our knowledge of brain organi­
zation. 
24. Some brain activation images produced by the subtractive method 
may produce false and misleading associations of brain regions with cog­
nitive activity. 
25. Some brain activation images produced by the subtractive method 
may hide salient cognitive activity. 
26. The averaging, normalizing, and standardizing transformations used 
to process brain images can potentially distort our knowledge of brain 
organization. 
27. The observed spatial and temporal instability of both intrasubject 
and intersubject brain responses and their extreme variability suggests 
that mathematical and statistical methods may be subject to severe arti­
facts. 
28. Arbitrary criterion threshold levels can potentially distort our 
knowledge of brain organization. 
29. All brain scanning procedures are constrained in serious ways. They 
may, in some special circumstances, tell you where something that is a 
part of a complex system is happening, but not what is happening there 
or what its role is in the system. 
Summary and Conclusions 
21 7 
30. The localization of activity associated with a certain cognitive pro­
cess in one part of the brain does not exclude the participation of other 
regions in the process. 
31. Any cognitive process involves broadly distributed regions of the ce­
rebral mantle and probably many brain stem centers and nuclei. 
32. There are several potentially misleading technical artifacts involved 
in the use of a scanning device that can affect the accuracy of the data 
analysis. These artifacts result specifically from hardware limitations and 
both internal and external interferences. 
33. The chain of logic from the data obtained in a brain scanning proce­
dure to the assumption that such data are identifiable with cognitive 
functions is long and treacherous. 
34. Given the complexities of the scanning methods and the lack of con­
straints on hypothesizing cognitive components, any cognitive process 
that can be named, no matter how outlandish, can be localized in a brain 
region-if sought. 
35. Because the localization of a cognitive process requires an existing 
theory and hypothetical cognitive components, any results obtained will 
largely be determined by that theory and by those hypotheses or by the 
experimental design, and not by the true psychobiology of the system. 
36. The main conclusion to be drawn from this chain of logic and the 
findings it produces is that the brain represents cognitive processes in a 
highly distributed and interactive manner. The idea that these processes 
can be precisely localized, though it has persisted, is fundamentally 
incorrect. 
Perhaps it is even more important to appreciate a more damaging as­
pect of the precise localization hypothesis. Even if we could associate 
precisely defined cognitive functions in particular areas of the brain (and 
this seems highly unlikely), it would tell us very little if anything about 
how the brain computes, represents, encodes, or instantiates psychologi­
cal processes. The answer to that neuroreductionist goal must be found 
at another level of analysis in the details of the interactions among the 
neurons of the great networks of the brain, not where these networks 
may be located. For reasons discussed here and elsewhere, this is even 
less likely to be achieved. This is not to argue that localization research is 
useless. Clearly it has very definite contributions to make in helping us to 
understand which structures (among others) may be involved in certain 
behaviors. However, on the theoretical level at which brain activity 

2 1 8  
Chapter 5 
becomes mind activity, the entire localization issue may be an ill-posed 
question that is being asked at the wrong level. 
5.3 Final Comments 
The difficulties that emerge in the search for narrowly circumscribed 
brain regions in which cognitive processes are supposed to be localized 
are typical of virtually any attempt to reduce cognitive activity to neural 
or process components. All are beset by some of the same problems and 
difficulties. Perhaps the most serious difficulty and one common to all 
such enterprises is the inadequate (and possibly impossible) definitions of 
the mental terms that are supposed to be localized or reduced. 
Noncircular definitions in this arena of science are virtually impossible to 
produce. Although there may be some shared connotations, precise de­
notations are nonexistent, primarily because the definitions are rarely 
operationally anchored. Psychology, often characterized as the study of 
these cognitive mechanisms, is thus faced with an initial handicap-How 
does one measure that which is indefinable? 
Other problems of complexity, numerousness, and chaotic or thermo­
dynamic irreversibility also bedevil our goals to achieve neuro- or cogni­
tive reductionist explanations. There are also important questions of the 
accessibility of mental processes and their analyzability into components 
that perhaps should take precedence over the search for neural correlates 
of mental activity. All of these problems are far more severe than any 
arising from the technical details of the methods used. Nevertheless, 
potential technical artifacts also complicate the search for localized 
representations. 
It seems that the only way to overcome these fundamental epis­
temological difficulties is to acknowledge the limits of any mentalist ap­
proach to scientific psychology and to return to some revitalized and 
improved form of behaviorism-an approach to solving psychological 
problems that is deaf to the siren song of reductive explanation and that 
makes rigorous use of descriptive terms and methods. When one peers 
deeply into psychological science, it is not too difficult to discern that a 
far larger portion of what we do is actually description rather than 
reductive explanation. Hence this suggestion is not so far-fetched as 
many current cognitive mentalists would argue. 
Summary and Conclusions 
2 1 9  
What form should this new behaviorism take? Over the years I have 
described one vision of it in Uttal ( 1981, 1988, 1998, 2000a). In the 
briefest of summaries, the new behaviorism can be characterized as fol­
lows: 
Psychophysical. It must utilize the well-controlled methods of psycho­
physical research. 
Anchored. Stimuli must be anchored to independent physical measures. 
Simple. Responses must be limited to simple (class A) discriminations 
such as "same" or "different" to minimize the cognitive penetration ef­
fects that distort functional relationships. 
Operational. Its concepts must be defined in terms of procedures, not in 
terms of unverifiable, ad hoc hypothetical constructs. 
Behaviorally descriptive. Its formal theories must be acknowledged to be 
only behaviorally descriptive and to be neutral with regard to underlying 
mechanisms. 
Neuronally nonreductive. It must abandon any hope of reducing psycho­
logical phenomena to the details of neural nets because of their computa­
tional intractability. 
Experimental. It must continue to engage in the empirical tussle with na­
ture that has characterized the best psychology in the past. 
Molar. It must look at behavior in terms of the overall, unitary, inte­
grated activity it is and avoid invoking a false modularity. 
Empiricistl and nativist. It must accept the compromise that both experi­
ence and evolved mechanisms motivate and drive behavior. 
Empiricist2 and rationalist. It must accept that compromise that behavior 
accrues from both stimulus determined (automatic) and logical (inferen­
tial) causal sequences. 
Antipragmatic. It must accept psychology's primary role as a theoretical 
science and base its goals on the quest for knowledge of the nature of our 
nature rather than on the immediate needs of society or the utility that 
some of its findings may seem to have. 
The pendulum, I believe, is about to swing back from a falsely 
reductive cognitive mentalism to a more positivist, operational, behav­
iorist perspective. If this book, along with its predecessors, has helped in 
some small way to renew the dialogue about the nature of the differences 
between the two perspectives, it will have realized its goals. 

Appendix A 
The Great Questions of Scientific Psychology 
Questions about Theories 
1. Is a unified theory of mind possible, or will it always be a system of 
microtheories? 
2. What are the conditions of necessity and sufficiency that make a the­
ory or law acceptable? 
3. What is an acceptable theory in psychology? 
4. Are the methods of a science evolved from the needs of physical sci­
ences appropriate for the study of psychological processes? 
5. Why is description not the same as explanation? 
6. Is there a psychological "uncertainty principle" that says we cannot 
examine mental processes without altering them? 
7. Which is the best approach to psychology-dualism, monism, or 
something else? 
8. What relation do mathematics and computer models have to the pro­
cesses they describe? 
9. Are the data of psychology sufficiently objective so that the great 
questions can be resolved? 
10. How can analogies mislead us into assuming that some processes are 
homologous? 
1 1 .  How can functional isomorphisms mislead us into assuming that 
some processes are identical? 
12. Can a semantic engine be simulated by a syntactic one? 
13. What are the arguments against identity theory or other monisms? 
14. What are the arguments against dualisms? 
15. How do the various schools of psychology really differ? 
1 6. Is functionalism synonymous with cognitive mentalism? 

222 
Appendix A 
1 7. Is there some kind of a physical reality that is the ultimate target of 
our psychological theories? 
1 8. Should pragmatic concerns or current ignorance or fundamental 
barriers specify what is a good or complete theory rather than the true 
natural reality? 
Questions about Mentalism and Behaviorism 
1 9. What is the relation between behavior and mind? 
20. What is behavior? 
21. Are descriptions of inner processes possible even though the inner 
processes cannot be dissected or reduced? 
22. Can behavior permit us to infer mental events? 
23. Are psychological states always associated with overt behavior? 
24. Of what value are verbal and introspective reports? 
Questions about Brain-Mind Relationships 
26. What are the epistemological limits of physiological psychology? 
What can we know about the mind-brain? 
27. What possible neural mechanisms could account for mental activity? 
Is it possible to say? Is it possible to know? 
28. Is reductionism possible? 
29. What is the proper level of inquiry for a neurophysiological analysis 
of mental processes? 
30. How does mind (macro properties) emerge from the concatenated 
action of neurons (micro properties)? 
3 1 .  Could the same psychological state be encoded by vastly different 
neural states, even in the same individual at different times? Can brain 
states be variable and flexible? 
32. What is the relation between brain and behavior-or between brain 
and mind? How does the brain represent and encode mind? 
33. Is it possible to explain mind in neural terms? 
34. Can mental or psychological processes be localized in particular por­
tions of the brain? 
35. If so, where are psychological processes located in the brain? What 
is the site of psychoneural equivalence? 
36. How are actions of the different regions of the brain coordinated? 
The Great Questions of Scientific Psychology 
223 
37. How do chemicals affect thought and behavior? 
38. Is mind or consciousness separable from brain events? 
39. What is the difference between psychoneural equivalence and trans­
mission codes? 
40. Can the mind affect the brain or other bodily activity? 
Questions about Mind 
41. Is mind accessible? 
42. Is mind measurable? 
43. What is the ontological nature of mind? 
44. What is self-awareness or consciousness? 
45. Do animals have self-awareness or consciousness? 
46. Does mind or consciousness persist after brain death? 
47. Is mind or consciousness accessible? 
48. Are cognitive processes independent entities, or do we have a single 
unified mental existence? 
49. If there are anything like cognitive faculties, are they localizable in 
different parts of the brain? 
50. What do fMRI and PET scans mean? 
5 1 .  Is mind or consciousness analyzable into components? 
52. Are we limited to molar behaviorism or some kind of modified 
operationalism? 
53. Is an analytic mentalistic science possible? 
54. What regulates behavior---environment, heredity, or both? 
55. Are some behaviors (e.g., speech) innate or must everything be 
learned? 
56. What is emotion? 
57. What, in general, is the nature of the terms we use to describe cogni­
tive entities, faculties, and processes such as learning, perceiving, think­
ing, or emotion? 
58. Are these terms the result of our experimental designs or do they ref­
er to true psychobiological realities? 
59. Are cognitive entities hypothetical constructs, intervening variables, 
or post hoc theories? 
60. Are our thoughts represented by isomorphic or symbolic representa­
tions? 
6 1 .  Is it possible to answer the question of inner representation? 

224 
Appendix A 
Questions about Sensation and Perception 
62. What are the codes for sensory communication? 
63. How do we sense the outside world? 
64. What are the implications of the nonveridicalities between the per­
ceived world and the independently measured world? 
65. How do we create three dimensions from two? 
66. Must we learn to perceive? 
67. How do we recognize patterns? Why are some patterns equivalent to 
others, even though they may be greatly distorted or abstracted? 
68. Are visual illusions determined by simple networks interactions or 
cognitive symbolic processing? 
69. Do we see by features or wholes? 
70. What is the role of high-level vision (cognitive penetration) in per­
ception? 
71. What is the role of low-level (peripheral) vision in perception? 
72. Is there any difference between sensation and perception? 
73. What can infants sense? 
74. Is there any difference between early and late vision? Do both exist? 
Questions about Learning 
75. Do we learn by associating mlcro components or by encoding 
configurations? 
76. What kinds of memory are there? 
77. How do we recover information from these memories? 
78. Where is the engram? Is there an engram? 
79. Do we learn by reason or by experience? 
80. What is the nature and role of reinforcement in learning. 
8 1 .  Do early childhood experiences regulate later mental life? 
Questions about "Cognition" 
82. How do we solve problems and make decisions? 
83. Can you think of two things or do two things at once? 
84. Are subjects aware of the logic of their decision processes? 
The Great Questions of Scientific Psychology 
225 
85. What are the laws that govern mental processes? 
86. What is attention? 
87. What do we mean by "attentive" as opposed to "preattentive" ?  
Other Questions 
88. What are the source and causes of mental health problems? 
89. How do we cure mental health problems? 
90. Can mind be measured in the same way as length and mass? 
91. Is the human governed by deterministic laws or does "free will" ex­
ist? 
92. Does mind have any influence on our body or brains? 
93. Is mind epiphenomenal? 
94. What are good psychological research questions? 
95. Do parapsychological processes, repressed memones, hypnosis, 
polygraphs, and the like have any validity? 
96. Are we "responsible" for our actions? 
97. Why do we sleep? 
98. How does our integrated awareness of the external world emerge 
from the coded components of sensory processing? 

Appendix B 
A Comment on the Zeitgeist 
To a surpnsmg, but very disappointing degree, many of the articles 
encountered as I was doing the research for this book had to be acknowl­
edged only as "submitted" or "personal communication"-or under­
went unusually long and troublesome review and publication lags. There 
appears to be a quite strong resistance to publishing arguments against 
the localization hypothesis among the editors and reviewers of the rele­
vant journals. On the other hand, if one examines the pages of America's 
preeminent and perhaps most prestigious scientific journal-Science-in 
recent years, virtually the only type of psychological article accepted for 
publication have been those involving some kind of correlation study be­
tween an imaging technique and a cognitive task. Obviously the zeitgeist 
is powerful and tends to reject that which is not in tune with the prevail­
ing set of scientific assumptions. Often such papers are subject to nit­
picking in ways that those with more conventional approaches are not. 
This conservatism is not the result of any conscious conspiracy. Indeed, 
within reason, such a selectivity is an important stabilizing feature of any 
science, preventing the clearly erroneous and idiosyncratic from divert­
ing attention and resources from more consensually acceptable topics. 
However, a hyperconservative barrier to the publication of novel or un­
popular ideas as such can be extremely damaging to our search for un­
derstanding. In lieu of some startling paradigm-changing discovery, 
when attempting to come to grips with a phantom such as a modular 
mental activity, it especially important that the logic, assumptions, and 
fundamental conceptualizations of research in that direction be scruti­
nized to determine their validity. 

228 
Appendix B 
The point I make here is that many of the authors that I have turned to 
for support and leadership often report having a very difficult time mak­
ing their antilocalization messages public. Some have used the scientific 
underground such as the Internet; some have dropped out of the fray; 
others (e.g., Shallice, 1988) have simply walked away from the very ar­
guments they themselves have made so compellingly and decided that 
presumed "progress" at any cost is better than an acceptance of the con­
straints and limits that they themselves have identified. I find this a very 
disappointing solution to what is obviously a very important problem. 
An interesting case history of this difficulty in making its way past the 
guardians of the zeitgeist can be found in a Internet-posted, but unpub­
lished, article written by Harpaz ( 1 999). The argument offered by the 
author was that the few PET and fMRI results on cognitive localization 
that had been replicated produced data that were best characterized as 
"irreplicable." This web site article then went on to list the history of the 
submission of the article to a series of journals and to publish verbatim 
accounts of the reviews (and rejection letters and E-mails) that were 
received. 
It is not possible, of course, to determine from such a presentation if 
Harpaz, 1999, was actually inadequate in some way or if it was being 
subjected to a higher set of acceptability standards because of its 
antilocalization views. There is a certain "breathlessness" about the au­
thor's writing style and incompleteness in his presentation suggesting 
that his position was not the only source of difficulty. On the other hand, 
the tone of some of the reviews indicates that the criteria used in evaluat­
ing this paper were far more severe than might have been used for a pa­
per more in concert with current opinion. Whether Harpaz's complaints 
are justified or not, his harsh and uniformly negative treatment at the 
hands of reviewers is consistent with reports I have received from some 
of the other antilocalization authors mentioned in this book. 
In the past, during the heyday of experimental brain lesion research, 
there was rarely any criticism of the logic and assumptions that lay be­
hind the technical procedure. On the other hand, the journals were filled 
with articles demonstrating proposed relationships between damaged 
brain sites and hypothetical cognitive components. Eventually, the once 
Comment on the Zeitgeist 
229 
popular lesion procedures were replaced or simply fell out of favor. To­
day, we are confronted with a new approach to the localization problem 
and, once again, there is at least the possibility that we are moving down 
the track to the same kind of conceptual dead end. I believe this is occur­
ring because of an inadequate examination of the most fundamental as­
sumptions of the new imaging approaches to the localization of 
psychological processes. 
As much as I find the refusal to consider minority counterviews repug­
nant, it must be pointed out that such a reaction is not unusual in psy­
chology. As Leahey ( 1997, p. 327) points out, Watson's seminal work 
(1913) on behaviorism was met with "published responses [that] were 
both few and remarkably restrained." 
Similarly, Dawes's comprehensive review ( 1994) of the myths lying be­
hind so much of the psychotherapy enterprise has encountered a huge si­
lence in the psychological literature and the halls of academe-a silence 
reminiscent of the absence in the scientific literature of other views that 
run counter to the zeitgeist. 
For this reason-the widespread tacit agreement to bury unpopular 
ideas-some of the papers that I feel are important may not be generally 
available. Although one could always argue that these authors are so pa­
tently wrongheaded that a serious reviewer would be well advised to rec­
ommend rejection, I do not believe this is always the case. Because the 
ideas advanced by these critics converge to a considerable degree, I be­
lieve attention should be paid to their arguments. The refusal to consider 
what they have to say should be replaced by vigorous controversy. 
Philosophers have dealt with the problematic power of the zeitgeist for 
years. Hanson ( 1958)-a philosopher of the physical sciencesʐwrote a 
deeply insightful essay on the relationships between observation, evi­
dence, facts, causality, hypotheses, laws, principles and our theories of 
the world. Although, his main interest was directed at the new 
"microphysics" of the twentieth century, much of what he had to say is 
directly relevant to the problems of neuroreductionism of which the lo­
calization problem is a major part. Among the many points he made is 
that what we "see" when confronted with some stimulus depends very 
much on our past experience and theoretical orientation. In Hanson's 

230 
Appendix B 
words, "there is more to seeing than meets the eyeball. . . .  Disparities in 
. . .  accounts arise in ex post factor interpretations . . .  not in the funda­
mental visual data." (pp. 7, 8). 
Just as the layperson's experience dictates what it is that is "seen",t so 
the scientist's a priori theory or point of view dictates how experimental 
observations are interpreted. For example, one of the major theoretical 
points of view, widely held among classic as well as contemporary scien­
tists, is that causality is due to a linear string of events. Hanson ( 1958) 
points out that the beautiful bit of poetry beginning "For want of a nail a 
shoe was lost" and ending with "all for the want of a nail" represents a 
dominant, but highly incorrect approach to the study of complex sys­
tems. In such systems, the real sources of behavior are multiple and inter­
acting causes, and it is impossible to trace backward to some single cause 
or initial condition. Such arguments have a very familiar ring. The argu­
ments in support of specific localization of mental functions in particular 
parts of the brain and even of the existence of isolable cognitive compo­
nents often are implicitly based on assumptions of a nonexistent linearity 
or simplicity using a fallacious logic of exactly this same genre. Shallice's 
discussion ( 1 988) of alternative, equally probable models of system orga­
nization, Wimsatt's comments ( 1 974) on multiple decompositions, and 
more recent ideas about the multiple causation involved in chaotic sys­
tems should alert us once again to how relevant Hanson's admonition is 
to the context of localization theory. Indeed, many of the systems in 
which we are currently interested may be more chaotic internally than 
their superficial behavior may suggest. However well ordered observed 
behavior may be, it may be based on the concatenation of a multitude of 
inaccessible nonlinear mechanisms. 
Not only is publication sometimes more difficult for those who run 
counter to the zeitgeist, but even after an article has been published, the 
minority view does not receive the same attention as the majority per-
1. Would my readers be more comfortable if "perceived" was used here rather 
than "seen" ? Both these words seem to me to convey the same meaning. I have 
always had a deep conviction that there was little to be gained by distinguishing 
between sensation and perception in psychology. Even the simplest "sensations" 
usually turned out to be much more complicated than they seemed at first, and to 
be heavily affected by what psychologists call "cognitive penetration." 
Comment on the Zeitgeist 
231 
spective. For example, Wise et al. (1991) carried out a PET study seeking 
to determine if any differences in the images occurred between words 
and nonwords. Their data indicated that this was not the case: 
We demonstrated that categorical judgments on heard pairs of real words acti­
vate neural networks along both superior temporal gyri, but with an anatomical 
distribution no different from that seen when the subjects listened to non-words. 
(p. 1 803) 
This finding contradicts the pioneering studies of nearly the same 
problem carried out by Petersen et al. ( 1988, 1989), which observed that 
real words and nonwords activated different regions. Wise et al. ( 1991 ) 
went on to discuss what might be critical differences between the two ex­
periments, but given the discrepancy between the two studies, it is hard 
to understand how their impact could have been so different. The Cita­
tion Index lists 321 citations for Wise et al., 1991, and 746 citations for 
Petersen et al., 1989. Thus, an article with a result that runs counter to a 
popular point of view is cited less than half as many times as the one con­
sistent with the zeitgeist. 
Collectively, the points of view and the experience of a scientific com­
munity, as well as its corpus of current formal theories, may act to select, 
often incorrectly, which observations and data are to be transmitted 
within that community. Therefore, what the antilocalization gadflies are 
experiencing these days is neither unusual nor entirely unexpected. At 
the present time, the mentalist zeitgeist, dominated by cognitive neuro­
science, has reified separate mental modules and their distinct cerebral 
localization. It implicitly assumes that systems are linearly causal and 
that dissociative and subtractive strategies do indeed peer directly into 
the organization of the brain-mind. This point of view is so ingrained 
that even some of those who see its confusions, circularities, and logical 
inconsistencies especially clearly are able to abandon logic for romantic 
fantasies of a totally unconstrained and limitless science. However ap­
pealing the prospect of attaining such a chimerical goal may be, many 
sciences confront and live happily with their limits and constraints. Cog­
nitive neuroscience should also. 

References 
Altarelli, M., Schlacter, F., & Cross, ]. ( 1 998). Making ultra bright X rays. Scien­
tific American, 279 66-73. 
Anderson, ]. R., & Lebiere, C. (1998). The Atomic Components of Thought. 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Anderson, }. A., Silverstein, ]. W., Ritz, S. A., & Jones, R. S. ( 1977). Distinctive 
features, categorical perception, and probability learning: Some applications of a 
neural model. Psychological Review, 84, 413-451 .  
Anonymous. ( 1 998). God in the Brain? Maybe, Say Researchers [On-line]. Avail­
able Internet: http://users.universe.coml?tfrisen/brain.htm 
Ashby, W. R. (1960). An Introduction to Cybernetics. New York: Wiley. 
Bain, A. ( 1859). The Emotions and the Will. London: Parker. 
Barch, D. M., Braver, T. S., Nystrom, L. E., Forman, S. D., Noll, D. c., & Co­
hen, ]. D. ( 1997). Dissociating working memory from task difficulty in human 
prefrontal cortex. Neuropsychologia, 35, 1373-1380. 
Bartholow. ( 1874). Experimental investigations into the functions of the human 
brain. American Journal of Medical Sciences. 
Beatty, J., & Uttal, W. R. ( 1 968). The effect of grouping visual stimuli on the cor­
tical evoked potential. Perception and Psychophysics, 4, 214-217. 
Bell, C. ( 1 8 1 1 ). Idea of a New Anatomy of the Brain Submitted for the Observa­
tion of His Friends. London: Strahan and Preston. 
Berger, H. ( 1 929). tiber das Elektrenkephalogramm des Menschen. Archiv fur 
Psychiatrie, 87, 527-570. 
Blakemore, S.-J., Rees, G., & Firth, C. D. ( 1 998). How do we predict the conse­
quences of our actions? A functional imaging study. Neuropsychologia, 36, 521-
529. 
Bloch, F., Hansen, W. W., & Packard, M. ( 1 946). The nuclear induction experi­
ment. Physical Review, 70, 474-485. 
Boring, E. G. (1929/1950). A History of Experimental Psychology. New York: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts. 

234 
References 
Braak, H. ( 1 992). The human entorhinal cortex: Normal morphology and 
lamina-specific pathology in various diseases. Neuroscience Research, 15, 6-3l. 
Brazier, M. A. B. (196 1 ). A History of the Electrical Activity of the Brain. Lon­
don: Pitman Medical. 
Broca, P. ( 1861). Remarques sur la siege de la faculte du langage articule, suives 
d'une observation d'aphemie (perte de la parole). Billions de la Societe 
Anatomique de Paris, 36, 330-357. 
Brodmann, K. ( 1 909). Vergleichende Lokalisationlehre der Grosshirnrinde in 
ihren Prinzipen dargestellt auf Grund des Zellenbaues. Leipzig: Barth. 
Bruneau, N., Roux, S., Guirin, P., Barthilimy, c., & Lelord, G. ( 1997). Temporal 
prominence of auditory evoked potentials (N1 wave) in 4-8-year-old children. 
Psychophysiology, 34, 32-38. 
Buechel, C, Coull, J. T., & Friston, J. K. ( 1 999). The predictive value of changes 
in effective connectivity for human learning. Science, 283, 1538-154l. 
Buechel, c., & Friston, K. J. (1997). Modulation of connectivity in visual path­
ways by attention: Cortical interactions evaluated with structural equation mod­
eling and fMRI. Cerebral Cortex, 7, 768-778. 
Carpenter, A. E, Georgopoulos, A. P., & Pellizzer, G. ( 1 999). Motor cortical en­
coding of serial order in a context-recall task. Science, 283, 1752-1757. 
Carpenter, M. B., & Sutin, J. ( 1 983). Human Neuroanatomy. Baltimore: Wil­
liams and Wilkins. 
Carroll, J. B. ( 1 993). Human Cognitive Abilities: A Survey of Factor-Analytic 
Studies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Caton, R. (1875). The electric currents of the brain. British Medical Journal, 2, 
2. 
Caton, R. ( 1877). Interim report on investigation of the electric currents of the 
brain. British Medical Journal, suppl. vol. 1, 62-65. 
Caton, R. ( 1 877). Interim report on investigation of the electric currents of the 
brain. British Medical Journal, Supplement, 1, 62-65. 
Chomsky, N. ( 1 980). Rules and representations. The Behavioral and Brain Sci­
ences, 3, 1-15. 
Clark, V. P., Fannon, S., Lai, S., Benson, R., & Bauer, L. (2000). Responses to 
rare visual target and distractor stimuli using event related fMRI. Journal of 
Neurophysiology, 83, 3133-3139. 
Cohen, J. D., Perlstein, W. M., Braver, T. S., Nystrom, L. E., Noll, D. c., Jonides, 
J., & Smith, E. E. ( 1 997). Temporal dynamics of brain activation during a work­
ing memory task. Nature, 386, 604-608. 
Connor, S. ( 1998). "God Spot" in Our Brain?? [On-line). Available Internet: 
http://ww.blazenet.comlthewatchmanlgodspot.html 
Crosby, E. c., Humphrey, T., & Lauer, E. W. (1962). Correlative Anatomy of the 
Nervous System. New York: Macmillan. 
References 
235 
Damadian, R. ( 1 971). Tumor detection by nuclear magnetic resonance. Science, 
1 71, 1 151-1 153. 
Damasio, H. ( 1 991). Neuroanatomical correlates of the aphasias. In M. T. Sarno 
(Ed.), Acquired Aphasia. New York: Academic Press. 
Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H., & Christen, Y. ( 1 996). Neurobiology of Decision 
Making. Berlin: Springer. 
Davies, J. D. ( 1 955). Phrenology: Fad and Science. A 1 9th-Century American 
Crusade. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
Dawes, R. M. ( 1994). House of Cards: Psychology and Psychotherapy Built on 
Myth. New York: Free Press. 
Dawson, G. D. (1950). Cerebral responses to nerve stimulation in man. British 
Medical Bulletin, 6, 326-329. 
Dawson, G. D. (1954). A summation technique for the detection of small evoked 
potentials. EEG and Clinical Neurophysiology, 6, 65-84. 
Dehaene, S., Spelke, E., Pinel, R., Stanescu, R., & Tsivkin, S. (1999). Sources of 
mathematical thinking: behavior and brain Imaging evidence. Science, 284, 970-
974. 
Donders, E C. ( 1868/1969). On the Speed of Mental Processes. W. G. Koster, 
(Trans.) Acta Psychologica, 30, 412-43l. 
Dowsett, D. J., Kenny, P. A., & Johnston, R .  E .  ( 1 998). The Physics of Diagnos­
tic Imaging. London: Chapman and Hall. 
Dresp, B., & Bonnet, C. (1995). Subthreshold summation with illusory con­
tours,. Vision Research, 35, 1071-1078. 
DuBois-Reymond, E. (1848). Untersuchungen uber thierisch Elektrizitiit. Berlin: 
Reimer. 
Duncan, J. ( 1 995). Attention, intelligence, and the frontal lobes. In M. I. 
Gazzaniga (Ed.), The Cognitive Neurosciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Efron, R. ( 1990). The Decline and Fall of Hemispheric Specialization. Hillsdale, 
NJ: Erlbaum. 
Elfgren, C. I., & Risberg, J. (1998). Lateralized frontal blood flow increases dur­
ing fluency tasks: influence of cognitive strategy. Neuropsychologia, 6, 505-512. 
Epstein, H. T. ( 1 999). Other brain effects of words. Behavioral and Brain Sci­
ences, 22, 287-288. 
Farah, M. J. ( 1 994). Neuropsychological inference with an interactive brain: A 
critique of the "locality" assumption. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1 7, 43-
104. 
Felleman, D. J., and Van Essen, D. C. ( 1991). Distributed hierarchical processing 
in primate visual cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 1, 1-47. 
Ferrier, D. (1 875). Experiments on the brains of monkeys. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society [161). 

236 
References 
Ferrier, D. ( 1 886). Functions of the Brain. New York: Putnam. 
Fitzgerald, M. J. T. (1985). Neuroanatomy: Basic and Applied. London: Baillere 
Tindall. 
Flourens, P. ( 1 846). Phrenology Examined. Philadelphia: Hogan and Thompson. 
Fodor, J. ( 1983). The Modularity of Mind: An Essay on Faculty Psychology. 
Cambridge MA: MIT Press. 
Freud, S. ( 1891). Zur Auffassung der Aphasien. Vienna: Deuticke. 
Friston, K. J. (1997). Imaging cognitive anatomy. Trends in Cognitive Science, 1, 
21-27. 
Friston, K. J. ( 1998). Imaging neuroscience: Principles or maps? Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A., 95, 796-802. 
Friston, K. J. (2000a). The labile brain: 1. Neuronal transients and nonlinear 
coupling. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, 355, 
215-236. 
Friston, K. J. (2000b). The labile brain: 2. Transients, complexity, and selection. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, 355, 237-252. 
Friston, K. J. (2000c). The labile brain: 3. Transients and spatio-temporal recep­
tive fields. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, 355, 
253-265. 
Friston, K. ]., Buechel, c., Fink, G. R., Morris, ]., Rolls, E., & Dolan, R. J. 
( 1997). Psychophysiological and modulatory interactions in neuroimaging. 
NeuroImage, 6, 218-229. 
Friston, K. ]., Fletcher, P., Josephs, 0., Holmes, A., Rugg, M. D., & Turner, R. 
(1998). Event-related fMRI: Characterizing differential responses. NeuroImage, 
7, 30-40. 
Fritsch, G., & Hitzig, E. ( 1 870). Dber die eletkrische Erregbarkeit des 
Grosshirns. Archiv fur Anatomie, Physiologie, und Wissenschaftliche Medizin, 
37, 300-332. 
Fuster, J. M. ( 1 989). The Prefrontal Cortex: Anatomy, Physiology, and 
Neuropsychology of the Frontal Lobes. New York: Raven. 
Gall, F. ]., & Spurzheim, J. C. ( 1808). Recherches sur Ie systeme nerveux en 
general, et sur celui du cerveau en particulier. Academie de Sciences, Paris, Mem­
oirs. 
Gallagher, R., & Appenzeller, T. (1999). Beyond reductionism. Science, 284, 79-
1 09. 
Galton, F. ( 1 883). Inquiries in Human Faculty and its Development. London: 
Dent. 
Gardner, H. ( 1 983). Frames of Mind: The Idea of Multiple Intelligences. New 
York: Basic Books. 
Gardner, H. ( 1 999, February). Who owns intelligence? Atlantic, 283, 67-76. 
References 
237 
Gautier, 1., Skudlarski, P., Gore, J. c., & Anderson, A. W. (2000). Expertise for 
cars and birds recruits brain areas involved in face recognition. Nature Neurosci­
ence, 3, 191-198. 
Gazzaniga, M. S. ( 1 983). Right hemisphere language following brain bisection. 
American Psychologist, 38, 525-537. 
Geshwind, N. (1970). The organization of language and the brain. Science, 1 70, 
940-944. 
Gilden, D. L. (1997). Fluctuations in the time required for elementary decisions. 
Psychological Science, 8, 296-301. 
Gourlay, K., Uttal, W. R., & Powers, M. ( 1974). VRS: A programming system 
for visual electrophysiological research. Behavior Research Methods & Instru­
mentation, 6, 281-287. 
Grafman, J. ( 1994). Alternative frameworks for the conceptualization of 
prefrontal lobe functions. In F. Boller & J. Grafman (Eds.), Handbook of 
Neuropsychology. New York: Elsevier. 
Grafman, ]., Partiot, A., & Hollnagel, C. ( 1 995). Fables in the prefrontal cortex. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1 8, 349-358. 
Gratton, G., & Fabiani, M. (1998). Dynamic brain imaging: Event-related opti­
cal signal (EROS) measures of the time course and localization of cognitive­
related activity. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 5, 535-563. 
Greenberg, ]., Hand, P., Sylvestro, A., & Reivich, M. ( 1979). Localized meta­
bolic-flow couple during functional activity. Acta Neurologica Scandinavica, 60, 
12-13. 
Gregory, R. L. (1961). The brain as an engineering problem. In W. H. Thorpe & 
O. L. Zangwill (Eds.), Current Problems in Animal Behavior. Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press 
Grey Walter, W., Cooper, R., Aldridge, V. J., MaCallum, W. c., & Winter, A. L. 
( 1 964). Contingent negative variation: An electric sign of sensorimotor associa­
tion and expectancy in the human brain. Nature, 203, 380-384. 
Gross, C. G., Roche-Miranda, G. E., & Bender, D. B. ( 1972). Visual properties 
of neurons in the inferotemporal cortex of the macaque. Journal of 
Neurophysiology, 35, 96-1 1 1 .  
Gulyas, B., & Roland, P. E. ( 1994a). Cortical fields activated by form, color, and 
binocular disparity discrimination: Functional anatomy by positron emission to­
mography. European Journal of Neuroscience, 6, 1 8 1 1-1 827. 
Gulyas, B., & Roland, P. E. ( 1994b). Binocular disparity detection in human vi­
sual cortex: Functional anatomy by positron emission tomography. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A., 91, 1239-1243. 
Hammond, K. R., Hamm, R. M., & Grassia, J. ( 1986). Generalizing over condi­
tions by combining the multitrait multimethod matrix and the representative de­
sign of experiments. Psychological Bulletin, 1 00, 257-269. 

238 
References 
Hanson, N. R. ( 1 958). Patterns of Discovery: An Inquiry into the Conceptual 
Foundations of Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Harmon, L. D. (1959). Artificial neuron. Science, 129, 962-963. 
Harpaz, Y. ( 1 999). Replicability of Cognitive Imaging of the Cerebral Cortex by 
PET and fMRI: A Survey of Recent Literature. [On-line]. Available Internet: 
http://www.yehouda.comlreplicability.html 
Herbart, J. E ( 1809/1891). A Text-Book in Psychology: An Attempt to Found 
the Science of Psychology on Experience, Metaphysics, and Mathematics. M. K. 
Smith, Trans .. New York: Appleton. 
Herbart, J. E (1902. The Science of Education: Its General Principles Deduced 
from its Aim and The Aesthetic Revelation of the world. Boston: Heath. 
Hilgetag, C c., O'Neill, M. A., & Young, M. P. ( 1 996). Indeterminate organiza­
tion of the visual system. Science, 271, 776-777. 
Holzinger, K. J., & Harman, H. H. (1941). Factor Analysis: A Synthesis of Fac­
torial Methods. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Hornak, J. P. (1999). The Basics of MRI [On-line]. Available Internet: http:// 
ww.cis.rit.edulhtbooks/mri 
Ishai, A., & Sagi, D. ( 1 995). Common mechanisms of visual imagery and percep­
tion. Science, 268, 1 1 72-1 174. 
Iwai, E., & Mishkin, M. ( 1 990). Vision, memory, and the temporal lobe. Paper 
presented at the Proceedings of the Tokyo Symposium, Tokyo. 
Jacobsen, c. E ( 1 935). Functions of the frontal association areas in primates. Ar­
chives of Neurology and Psychiatry, Chicago, 33, 558-569. 
James, W. (1892). Psychology: Briefer Course. New York: Holt. 
Jardine, c. J., Jardine, N., & Sibson, R. (1967). The structure and construction 
of taxonomic hierarchies. Mathematical Biosciences, 1, 173-179. 
Jiang, Y., Haxby, J. v., Martin, A., Ungerleider, L. G., & Parasuraman, R. 
(2000). Complementary neural mechanisms for tracking items in human work­
ing memory. Science, 287, 643-646. 
Kandel, E. R., & Kupfermann, 1. ( 1 995). From nerve cells to cognition. In 
Kandel, E. R., Schwartz, J. H., & Jessell, T. M. (Eds). Essentials of Neural Sci­
ence and Behavior. Norwalk, CT: Appleton and Lange. 
Kandel, E. R., Schwartz, J. H., & Jessell, T. M. ( 1 991). Principles of Neural Sci­
ence. New York: Elsevier. 
Kandel, E. R., & Kupfermann, 1. ( 1 995). From nerve cells to cognition. In E. R. 
Kandel, J. H. Schwartz, & T. M. Jessell (Eds.), Essentials of Neural Science and 
Behavior. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange. 
Kandel, E. R., Schwartz, J. H., & Jessell, T. M. (1995). Essentials of Neural Sci­
ence and Behavior. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange. 
Kanwisher, N., McDermott, J., & Chun, M. M. ( 1997). The fusiform face area: 
A module in human extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 1 7, 4302-431 1 .  
References 
239 
Kapur, S., Tulving, E., Cabeza, R., McIntosh, A. R., Houle, S., & Craik, E 1. M. 
(1996). The neural correlates of intentional learning of verbal materials: A PET 
study in humans. Cognitive Brain Research, 4, 243-249. 
Kastner, S., De Weerd, P., Desimone, R., & Ungerleider, L. G. ( 1 998). Mecha­
nisms of directed attention in the human extrastriate cortex as revealed by func­
tional MR!. Science, 282, 108-1 1 1 .  
Kauffman, S .  A .  (1971). Articulation o f  parts explanations in biology. In R. C. 
Buck and R. S. Cohen (Eds.), Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science: Vol. 8 
(pp. 257-272). Boston: Reidel. 
Kelso, J. A. S., Case, P., Holroyd, T., Horvath, E., Raczaszek, Tuller, B., & Ding, 
M. (1995). Multistability and metastability in perceptual and brain dynamics. In 
M. Stadler & P. Kruse (Eds.), Ambiguity in Mind and Nature. Berlin: Springer. 
Kennedy, J. L. ( 1959). A possible artifact in electroencephalography. Psychologi­
cal Review, 66, 347-352. 
Kertesz, A. ( 1979). Aphasia and Associated Disorders: Taxonomy, Localization, 
and Recovery. New York: Grune & Stratton. 
Kelin, D. B. (1970). A History of Scientific Psychology: Its Origins and Philo­
sophical Backgrounds. New York: Basic Books. 
Kleist, K. ( 1 934). Gehirnpathologie. Leipzig: Barth. 
Koch, C, & Laurent, G. ( 1999). Complexity and the nervous system. Science, 
284, 96-98. 
Koch, S. ( 1 959). Epilogue. In S. Koch (Ed.), Psychology: A Study of a Science: 
Vol. 3. New York: McGraw-Hall. 
Kohler, S., Moscovitch, M., Winocur, G., Houle, S., & McIntosh, A. R. ( 1998). 
Networks of domain-specific and general regions involved in episodic memory 
for spatial location and object identity. Neuropsychologia, 36, 129-142. 
Koizumi, H., Yamashita, Y., Maki, A., Ito, Y., & Watanabe, E. (1998). Optical 
topography: A new concept for human brain mapping. In T. Yuasa, J. W. 
Prichard, & S. Ogawa (Eds.), Current Progress in Functional Brain Mapping: 
Science and Applications. Niigata, Japan, and London: Nishimura and Smith 
Gordon. 
Kopelman, M. D., Stanhope, N., & Kingsley, D. ( 1 997). Temporal and spatial 
context memory in patients with focal frontal, temporal lobe, and diencephalic 
lesions. Neuropsychologia, 35, 1533-1545. 
Kosslyn, S. M., Pascual-Leone, A., Felician, 0., Camposano, S., Keenan, J. P., 
Thompson, J. P., Ganis, G., Sukel, K. E., & Alpert, N. M. ( 1 999). The role of 
area 17 in visual imagery from PET and rTMS. Science, 284, 167-170. 
Kuhn, T. S. ( 1 962). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press. 
Laberge, D. ( 1 995). Computational and anatomical models of selective attention 
in object identification. In M. S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The Cognitive Neurosciences. 
Cambridge MA: MIT Press. 

240 
References 
Land, E. H. (1977). The Retinex theory of color vision. Scientific American, 237, 
108-128. 
Lane, R. D., Reiman, E. M., Bradley, M. M., Lang, P. ]., Ahern, G. L., Davidson, 
R. ]., & Schwartz, G. E. (1997). Neuroanatomical correlates of pleasant and un­
pleasant emotion. Neuropsychologia, 35, 1437-1444. 
Langlois, ]. H., & Roggman, L. A. (1990). Attractive faces are only average. Psy­
chological Science, 1, 1 15-12l. 
Lashley, K .  S .  (1929). Brain Mechanisms and Intelligence. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
Lashley, K. S. (1942). The problem of cerebral organization of vision. Biological 
Symposium, 7, 301-322. 
Lashley, K. S. (1950). In search of the engram. Symposium Society of Experimen­
tal Biology N. Y., 4, 454-482. 
Lauterbur, P. C. (1973). Image formation by induced local interactions. Exam­
ples employing nuclear magnetic resonance. Nature, 242, 190-19l. 
Leahey, T. H. (1997). A History of Psychology: Main Currents in Psychological 
Thought. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
LeDoux, ]. E. (1996). The Emotional Brain. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Lennenberg, E. H. (1974). Language and brain: Developmental aspects. 
Neurosciences Research Program Bulletin, 12, 51 1-656. 
Levins, R. (1966). The strategy of model building in population biology. Ameri­
can Scientist, 54, 421-43l. 
Lichteim, L .  (1885). O n  aphasia. Brain, 7, 433-484. 
Livingstone, M., & Hubel, D. (1988). Segregation of form, color, movement, 
and depth: Anatomy, physiology, and Perception. Science, 240, 740-749. 
Lockhead. (1992). Psychological scaling: Judgments of attributes of objects. Be­
havioral and Brain Sciences, 15, 543-60l. 
Lumer, E. D., Friston, K. J., & Rees, G. (1998). Neural correlates of perceptual 
rivalry in the human brain. Science, 280, 1930-1933. 
Luria, A. R. (1966). Higher Cortical Functions in Man. London: Tavistock. 
Luria, A. R. (1966). Human Brain and Psychological Processes. New York: 
Harper & Row. 
MacCorquodale, K., & Meehl, P. E. (1948). On a distinction between hypotheti­
cal constructs and intervening variables. Psychological Review, 55, 95-107. 
MacLean, P. D. (1949). Psychosomatic disease and the "visceral bran": Recent 
developments bearing on the Papez theory of emotion. Psychosomatic Medicine, 
1 1, 338-353. 
Macmillan, M. (2000). An Odd Kind of Fame: Stories of Phineas Gage. Cam­
bridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Magendie, E (1822). Experiences sur les fonctions des racines des nerfs 
rachidiens. Journal de Physiologie Experimentale et Pathologique, 2, 276-279. 
References 
241 
Mattson, ]., & Simon, M. (1996). The Pioneers of NMR and Magnetic Reso­
nance in Medicine: The Story of MRI. Jericho, NY: Dean Books. 
McCullough, C. (1965). Color adaptation of the edge detectors in the human vi­
sual system. Science, 149, 1 1 15-1 1 16. 
McGinn, C. ( 1994). Can we solve the mind-body-problem? In R. Warner & 
T. Szubka (Eds.), The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to the Current Debate. Ox­
ford: Blackwell. 
McIntosh, A. R., Rajah, M. N., & Lobaugh, N. ]. (1999). Interactions of 
prefrontal cortex in relation to awareness in sensory learning. Science, 284, 
1531-1533. 
Merians, A. S., Clark, M., Poizner, H., Macauley, B., Rothi, L. ]. G., & Heilman, 
K. M. ( 1997). Visual-imitative dissociation apraxia. Neuropsychologia, 35, 
1483-1490. 
Mettler, C. C, & Mettler, F. A. (1947). History of Medicine. Philadelphia: 
Blakiston. 
Milner, B. (1963). Effects of different brain lesions on card sorting. Archives of 
Neurology, 9, 90-100. 
Mishkin, M. (1966). Visual mechanisms beyond the striate cortex. In R. Russell 
(Ed.), Frontiers in Physiological Psychology (pp. 93-1 19). New York: Academic 
Press. 
Moore, E. E ( 1956). Automata Studies. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press. 
Moruzzi, G., & Magoun, H. (1949). Brain stem reticular formation and activa­
tion of the EEG. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 1, 455-
473. 
Muller, ]. (1840). Handbuch der Physiologie des Menschen, vol. 2. Koblenz: 
Holscher. 
Muller, R.-A., Courchesne, E., & Allen, G. ( 1998). The cerebellum: So much 
more. Science, 282, 879-880. 
Munk, H. (1881). Ober die Funktionen der Grosshirnrinde. Berlin: Hirschwald. 
Nagel, T. ( 1994). Consciousness and objective reality. In R. Warner & T. Szubka 
(Eds.), The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to the Current Debate. Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
Neisser, U. ( 1 967). Cognitive Psychology. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts. 
Newell, A. (1990). Unified Theories of Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 
Ojemonn, ]. G., Ojemonn, G. A., & Lettich, E. (1992). Neuronal activity related 
faces and matching in human right nondominant temporal cortex. Brain, 1 1 5, 1-
13. 
aids, ]., Disterhoft, ]. E, Segal, M., Kornblith, C. L., & Hirsch, R. (1972). 
Learning centers of rat brain mapped by measuring latencies of conditioned unit 
responses. Journal of Neurophysiology, 35, 202-219. 

242 
References 
Olds, J., & Milner, P. (1954). Positive reinforcement produced by electrical stim­
ulation of septal area and other regions of rat brain. Journal of Comparative and 
Physiological Psychology, 47, 419-427. 
Pachella, R. G. (1974). The interpretation of reaction time in information pro­
cessing research, In B. H. Kantowitz (Ed.), Human Information Processing: Tu­
torials in Performance and Cognition (pp. 41-82). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Papez, J. (1937). A proposed mechanism of emotion. Archives of Neurology and 
Psychiatry, Chicago, 38, 725-743. 
Pardo, J. V., Pardo, P., Janer, K., & Raichle, M. E. (1990). The anterior cingulate 
cortex mediates processing selection in the Stroop attention conflict paradigm. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A., 87, 256-259. 
Penfield, W. (1958). The Excitable Cortex in Man: The Fifth Sherrington Lec­
ture. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press. 
Penfield, W., & Jasper, H. (1954). Epilepsy and the Functional Anatomy of the 
Human Brain. Boston: Little, Brown. 
Penfield, W., & Rasmussen, T. (1950). The Cerebral Cortex of Man. New York: 
Macmillan. 
Penfield, W., & Roberts, L. (1959). Speech and Brain Mechanisms. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Petersen, S. E., Fox, P. T., Posner, M. 1., Mintun, M., & Raichle, M. (1988). Posi­
tron emission tomographic studies of the cortical anatomy of single-word pro­
cessing. Nature, 331, 585-589. 
Petersen, S. E., Fox, P. T., Posner, M. 1., Mintun, M., & Raichle, M. ( 1989). Posi­
tron emission tomographic studies of the processing of single words. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 1, 153-170. 
Pinker, S. (1997). How the Mind Works. New York: Norton. 
Plaut, D. C. (1995). Double dissociation with out modularity. Journal of Clinical 
and Experimental Neuropsychology, 1 7, 291-32l. 
Plaut, D. c., & Farah, M. J .  (1990). Visual object representation: Interpreting 
neurophysiological data within a computational framework. Journal of Cogni­
tive Neuroscience, 2, 320-343. 
Ploghaus, A., Tracey, 1., Gati, J. S., Clare, S., Menon, R. S., Matthews, P. M., & 
Rawlins, J. N. P. (1999). Dissociating pain from its anticipation in the human 
brain. Science, 284, 1979-198l. 
Poepple, D. (1996). A critical review of phonological processing. Brain and Lan­
guage, 55, 317-37l. 
Posner, M. 1., & DiGirolamo, G. J. ( 1999). Flexible neural circuitry in word pro­
cessing. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 299-300. 
Posner, M. 1., & Petersen, S. E. ( 1990). The attention system of the human brain. 
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 13, 25-42. 
Posner, M. 1., & Raichle, M. E. ( 1994/1997). Images of Mind. New York: Scien­
tific American Library. 
References 
243 
Pravdich-Neminsky, V. V. (1913). Experiments on the registration of the electri­
cal phenomena of the mammalian brain (Original in German). Zentralblatt 
Physiologie, 27, 951-960. 
Pribram, K. H., Nuwer, M., & Baron, R. J. (1974). The holographic hypothesis 
of memory structure in brain function and perception. In D. H. Krantz (Ed.), 
Contemporary Developments in Mathematical Psychology: Vol. 2. San Fran­
cisco: Freeman. 
Pulvermiiller, F. (1999). Words in the brain's language. Behavioral and Brain Sci­
ence, 22, 253-336. 
Purcell, E. M., Torrey, H. c., & Pound, R. V. (1946). Resonance absorption by 
nuclear magnetic moments in a solid. Physical Review, 69, 37-38. 
Rabi, 1., I" Zacharias, J. R., Millman, S., & Kusch, P. (1937). A new method for 
measuring nuclear magnetic moments. Physical Review, 53, 318. 
Rabi, 1. 1., Zacharias, J. R., Millman, S., & Kusch, P. ( 1939). The molecular 
beam resonance method for measuring nuclear magnetic moment: The magnetic 
moments of 3Li6, 3Li7, and 9F19. Physical Review, 55, 526-535. 
Radon, J. (1917). Dber die Bestimung von Funktionen durch ihre Integralwerte 
langs gewisser Mannigfaltigkeiten. Mathemtische Physiks, Berichte Saechsische 
Akademie der Wisenschaften, Lepzig, 69, 262-277. 
Rafal, R., & Robertson, L. ( 1995). The neurology of visual attention. In M. S. 
Gazzaniga (Ed.), The Cognitive Neurosciences. Cambridge MA: MIT Press. 
Regan, D. ( 1989). Human Brain Electrophysiology: Evoked Potentials and 
Evoked Magnetic Fields in Science and Medicine. New York: Elsevier. 
Reiman, E. M., Lane, R. D., Van Petten, C. K., & Bandettini, P. A. (2000). Posi­
tron emission tomography and functional magnetic resonance imaging. In 
Berntson, G., Cacioppo, J. T., Tassinary, L. G. (Eds.), Handbook of 
Psychophysiology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Richman, D. P., Stewart, R. M., Hutchinson, J. W., & Caviness, V. S. J. (1975). 
Mechanical model of brain convolutional development. Science, 1 89, 1 8-2l .  
Robin, N., & Holyoak, K .  (1995). Relational complexity and the functions of 
prefrontal cortex. In M. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The Cognitive Neurosciences. Cam­
bridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Robinson, D. N., & Uttal, W. R. (1983). Foundations of Psychobiology. New 
York: Macmillan. 
Roland, P. E. (1993). Brain Activation: Wiley. 
Roland, P. E., & Gulyas, B. (1992). Anatomical studies in the human brain par­
ticipating in discrimination of visual patterns and formation of visual memories. 
Biomedical Research, 13, 1 1-14. 
Roland, P. E., Kawashima, R., Gulyas, B., & O'Sullivan, B. (1995). Positron 
emission tomography: Methodological constraints, strategies, and examples 
from learning and memory. In M. S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The Cognitive 
Neurosciences (pp. 781-788). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

244 
References 
Romero-Sierra, C. (1986). Neuroanatomy: A Conceptual Approach. New York: 
Churchill: Livingstone. 
Rushworth, M. E S., Nixon, P. D., Renowden, S., Wade, D. T., & Passingham, 
R. E. ( 1997). The left parietal cortex and motor attention. Neuropsychologia, 
35, 1261-1273. 
Salmelin, R., Helenius, P., & Kuukka, K. ( 1999). Only time can tell: words in 
context. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 300. 
Samelson, E ( 1980). J. B. Watson's Little Albert, Cyril Burt's twins, and the need 
for a critical science. American Psychologist, 35, 619-625. 
Savoy, R. L., & Gabrielli, J. D. E. ( 1 991). Normal McCullough effect in Alzhei­
mer's disease and global amnesia. Perception and Psychophysics, 49, 448-455. 
Schacter, D. L., & Wagner, A. D. ( 1 999). Remembrance of things past. Science, 
285, 1503-1504. 
Schmahmann, J. D., ( 1997). The Cerebellum and Cognition. San Diego, CA: Ac­
ademic Press. 
Sciamanna, E. ( 1 882). Gli avversari delle localizzazioni cerebrali. Psi chiatria, 
Scienze Penali ed Antropologia Criminale, 3, 209-215. 
Scoville, W. B., & Milner, B. (1957). Loss of recent memory after bilateral 
hippocampal regions. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 20, 
1 1-2l .  
Sekuler, R .  ( 1994). Perception and its interactive substrate: Psychophysical link­
ing hypotheses and psychophysical methods. Behavioral and Brain Science, 1 7, 
79. 
Shallice, T. ( 1988). From Neuropsychology to Mental Structure. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Simon, H. A. (1969). The Science of the Artificial. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Skinner, B. E ( 1 963). Behaviorism at fifty. Science, 140, 951-958. 
Skrandies, W. (1999). Early effects of semantic meaning on electrical brain activ­
ity. Brain and Behavioral Sciences, 22, 301-302. 
Smith, A. T., Greenlee, M. W., Singh, K. D., Kraemer, E M., & Hennig, J. 
(1998). The processing of first- and second-order motion in human visual cortex 
assessed by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Journal of Neurosci­
ence, 18, 3816-3830. 
Smith, E. E., Jonides, J., Marshuetz, c., & Koeppe, R. A. ( 1 998). Components of 
verbal working memory: Evidence from neuroimaging. Proceedings of the Na­
tional Academy of Sciences, U.S.A., 95, 876-882. 
Smith, E. E., & Jonides, J. ( 1 999). Storage and executive processes in the frontal 
lobes. Science, 283, 1 657-166l. 
Spearman, C. ( 1 904). "General Intelligence," objectively determined and mea­
sured. American Journal of Psychology, 15, 201-293. 
Spearman, C. ( 1 923). The Nature of "Intelligence" and the Principles of Cogni­
tion. London: Macmillan. 
References 
245 
Sperry, R. W. (1968). Mental unity following surgical disconnection of the cere­
bral hemispheres. The Harvey Lecture Series: Vol. 62 (pp. 293-323). New York: 
Academic Press. 
Spitzer, M., Belleman, M. E., Kammer, T., Guckel, E, Kischka, u., Maier, S., 
Schwartz, A., & Brix, G. ( 1996). Functional MR imaging of semantic informa­
tion processing and learning-related effects using psychometrically controlled 
stimulation paradigms. Cognitive Brain Research, 4, 149-16l. 
Spurzheim, G. ( 1 832). Outlines of Phrenology. Boston: Marsh, Capen, & Lyon. 
Squire, L. R. ( 1992). Memory and the hippocampus: A synthesis from findings 
with rats, monkeys, and humans. Psychological Review, 99, 195-23 l .  
Stein, B .  E., & Meredith, M .  A .  (1993). The Merging of the Senses. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
Sternberg, S. ( 1969a). The discovery of processing stages: extension of Donder's 
method. Acta Psychologica, 30, 276-315. 
Sternberg, S. (1969b). Memory scanning: Mental processes revealed by reaction 
time experiments. American Scientist, 57, 451-457. 
Sternberg, R. J. ( 1977). Intelligence, Information Processing, and Analogical 
Reasoning. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Sternberg, R. J. ( 1988). Intelligence. In R. J. Sternberg & E. E. Smith (Eds.), The 
Psychology of Human Thought (pp. 267-308). New York: Cambridge Univer­
sity Press. 
Stone, G. 0., Vanhoy, M., & Van Orden, G. C. (1997). Perception is a two way 
street: Feed forward and feed backward phonology in visual word recognition. 
Journal of Memory and Language, 36, 337-359. 
Stoner, G. R., & Albright, T. D (1993). Image segmentation cues in motion pro­
cessing: Implications for modularity. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 5, 129-
149. 
Tanner, W. P. Jr., & Swets, J. A. ( 1 954). A decision making theory of visual detec­
tion. Psychological Review, 61, 401-409. 
Teder-Salejarvi, W. A., & Hillyard, S. A. ( 1 998). The gradient of spatial auditory 
attention in free field: An event-related potential study. Perception and 
Psychophysics, 60, 1228-1243. 
Thorn, R. (1975). Structural Stability and Morphogenesis. Reading, MA: 
Benjamin. 
Thompson, R. E. ( 1 990). Neural mechanisms of classical conditioning in mam­
mals. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 329, 1 61-170. 
Thorndike. (1923). Educational Psychology. Vol. 3: Mental Work and Fatigue 
and Individual Differences and Their Causes. New York: Teachers College, Co­
lumbia University. 
Thurstone, L. L. ( 1 931). Multiple factor analysis. Psychological Review, 38, 
406-427. 

246 
References 
Thurstone, L. L. (1947). Multiple Factor Analysis: A Development and Expan­
sion of the Vectors of the Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Tononi, G., & Edelman, G. M. (1998). Consciousness and complexity. Science, 
282, 1 846-1 85I. 
Torgerson, W. S. (1958). Theory and Methods of Scaling. New York: Wiley. 
Tranel, D., Damasio, H., & Damasio, A. R. ( 1 997). A neural basis for the re­
trieval of conceptual knowledge. Neuropsychologia, 35, 1319-1327. 
Trannel, D., & Damasio, A. (1999). The neurobiology of knowledge retrieval. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 303. 
Trull, D. ( 1 998). The God spot. [On-line]. Available Internet: http:// 
www.sonic.netlǀric/otters/godspot2.htm 
Tuller, B., Case, P., Ding, M., & Kelso, J. A. S. (1994). The nonlinear dynamics 
of speech categorization. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Percep­
tion and Performance, 20, 3-16. 
Tulving, E. (1979). Memory research: What kind of progress? In L. G. Nilsson 
(Ed.), Perspectives in Memory Research. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Tunturi, A. R. (1952). A difference in the representation of auditory signals for 
the left and right ears in the isofrequency contours of right ectosylvian auditory 
cortex of the dog. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 1 68, 
712-727. 
Uttal, W. R. ( 1 967). Evoked brain potentials: Signs or codes? Perspectives in 
Medicine and Biology, 1 0, 627-639. 
Uttal, W. R. ( 1 978). The Psychobiology of Mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Uttal, W. R. (1988). On Seeing Forms. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Uttal, W. R. (1998). Toward a New Behaviorism: The Case against Perceptual 
Reductionism. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Uttal, W. R. (2000a). The War between Mentalism and Behaviorism: On the Ac­
cessibility of Mental Processes. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Uttal, W. R. (2000b). Summary: Let's pay attention to attention. The Journal of 
General Psychology, 127, 1 00-1 1 I .  
Uttal, W. R., & Cook, L. (1 964). Systematics of the evoked somatosensory corti­
cal potential: A psychophysical-electrophysiological comparison. Annals of the 
New York Academy of Sciences, 1 12, 60-80. 
Valenstein, E. S. ( 1 996). Great and Desperate Cures: The Rise and Decline of 
Psychosurgery and Other Radical Treatments for Mental Illness. New York: Ba­
sic Books. 
Valenstein, E. S. (1998). Blaming the Brain. New York: Free Press. 
Valenstein, E. S., Ed. ( 1 980). The Psychosurgery Debate: Scientific, Legal, and 
Ethical Perspectives. San Francisco: Freeman. 
Van Essen, D. C. (1985). Functional organization of the primate visual cortex. 
Cerebral Cortex, 3, 259-329. 
References 
247 
Van Essen, D. c., Anderson, C. H., & Felleman, D. J. ( 1992). Information pro­
cessing in the primate visual system: An integrated systems perspective. Science, 
225, 419-423. 
Van Orden, G. c., Jansen op de Haar, M. A., & Bosman, A. M. T. ( 1997). Com­
plex dynamic systems also predict dissociations, but they do not reduce to auton­
omous components. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 14, 131-165. 
Van Orden, G. c., & Paap, K. R. ( 1997). Functional neuroimages fail to discover 
pieces of mind in the parts of the brain. Philosophy of Science Proceedings, 64, 
S85-S94. 
Van Orden, G. c., Pennington, B. F., & Stone, G. O. (in press). What do double 
dissociations prove? Modularity yields a degenerating research program. Cogni­
tive Science. 
Vanzetta, I., & Grinvald, A. ( 1 999). Increase cortical oxidative metabolism due 
to sensory stimulation: Implications for functional brain imaging. Science, 286, 
1 555-1558. 
Vishton, P. M. (1998). Double dissociation can not indicate the presence of ana­
tomical modules in human brains (or kitchen appliances): Reasons to distinguish 
information and anatomical complexity. Personal communication. 
Von der Heydt, R., & Peterhans, E. ( 1 989). Mechanisms of contour perception 
in the monkey visual cortex. I. Lines of pattern discontinuity. The Journal of 
Neuroscience, 9, 1731-1748. 
Warner, R., & Szubka, T. (Eds.). (1 994). The Mind-Body Problem: A Guide to 
the Current Debate. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Watanabe, T. (1995). Orientation and color processing for partially occluded ob­
jects. Vision Research, 35, 647-656. 
Watson, J. B. (1913). Psychology as the behaviorist views it. Psychological Re­
view, 20, 158-177. 
Wauschkuhn, B., Verleger, R., Wascher, E., Klosterman, W., Burk, M., Heide, 
W., & Kampf, D. ( 1 998). Lateralized human cortical activity for shifting 
visuospatial attention and initiating saccades. Journal of Neurophysiology, 80, 
2900-2910. 
Welker, W. I. (1976). Brain evolution in mammals: A review of concepts, prob­
lems, and methods. In R. B. Masterson, M. E. Bitterman, B. Campbell, & 
N. Hotton (Eds.), Evolution of Brain and Behavior in Vertebrates. Potomac, 
MD: Erlbaum. 
Wernicke, C. (1874). Der aphasische Symptomenkomplex. Brieslau, Germany: 
Cohn and Weigert. 
Wimsatt, W. C. (1974). Complexity and organization. In K. F. Schaffner & R. S. 
Cohen (Eds.), PSA 1 972: Proceedings of the 1972 Biennial Meeting Philosophy 
of Science Association (Vol. 20 of the Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Sci­
ence). Boston: Dordrecht-Holland. 

248 
References 
Wise, R., Chollet, E, Hadar, U., Friston, K., Hoffner, E., & Frackowiak, R. 
(1991). Distribution of cortical neural networks involved in word comprehen­
sion and word retrieval. Brain, 1 1 4, 1803-1 817. 
Wood, C. C. (1978). Variations on a theme by Lashley: Lesion experiments on 
the neural model of Anderson, Silverstein, Ritz and Jones. Psychological Review, 
85, 582-59l .  
Woolsey, C .  N. (1952). Pattern of localization i n  sensory and motor areas of the 
cerebral cortex. The Biology of Mental Health and Disease. New York: Hoeber. 
Woolsey, C. N. (1961). Organization of the cortical auditory system. In W. A. 
Rosenblith (Ed.), Sensory Communication. Cambridge MA: MIT Press. 
Wurtz, R. H., Goldberg, M. E., & Robinson, D. L. (1980). Behavioral modificat­
ion of visual responses in the monkey: Stimulus selection for attention and move­
ment. Progress in Psychobiology and Physiological Psychology, 9, 43-83. 
Yuasa, T., Prichard, J. W., & Ogawa, S. (1998). Current Progress in Functional 
Brain Mapping: Science and Applications. Niigata, Japan, and London: 
Nishimura and Smith Gordon. 
Zheng, W., & Knudsen, E. I. (1999). Functional selection of adaptive auditory 
space map by GABAA-mediated inhibition. Science, 284, 962-965. 
Ziegler, J. c., & Jacobs, A. M. (1995). Phonological information provides early 
sources of constraint in the processing of letter strings. Journal of Memory and 
Language, 34, 567-593. 
Index 
American Phrenological Journal, 105 
Amnesia, 162 
Aquinas, Thomas, 99 
Aristotle, 7 
Attention, 137, 148-149 
Behavior, 15, 1 8  
and behaviorism, 206-207, 214-219 
early theories of, 93-99 
and electroencephalograms (EEG), 
5 1-52 
and lesion experiments, 1 1 8-119, 
159-160 
motor, 46-50 
Shallice on, 141-142 
study of, 206-207 
Thorndike on, 139-141 
and trauma, 23 
Bernard, Claude, 40 
Blood, 6-7 
flow and positron emission tomogra­
phy (PET), 70-71 
and hemorrhaging, 6-7 
Brain, the. See also Mental function; 
Mind, the 
anatomy of, 30-37, 3 1(figure), 
37(figure), 155-158 
Arabic study of, 9 
and attention, 137, 148-149 
and behavior, 15, 18, 23, 206-207, 
214-219 
and blood, 6-7 
Broca area of, 22 
Brodmann regions of, 32, 33(figure) 
cerebellum, 30, 33 
cerebral cortex of, 30-34, 36 
cerebral ventricles of, 8 
Chomsky on, 1 15-1 1 6  
and cognitive faculties, 1 1 6-1 1 8  
and computer-assisted X-ray tomog-
raphy, 61-68 
and consciousness, 148-149 
coupled systems of, 1 76 
and craniology, 102-109 
dissection of, 32 
and dissociation experiments, 179-
1 85 
in dolphins and whales, 34 
early theories of, 7-9 
electrical currents and, 10-1 1, 14, 
22, 40-42, 46-50 
and electroencephalograms (EEG), 3, 
50-52 
and emotions, 23, 140 
and evoked brain potential (EBP), 3, 
52-56 
and face recognition, 1 99-200 
and factor analysis, 1 19-123 
Fodor on, 96-99, 1 1 1-1 15 
and Galton's taxonomy, 123-124 
and Gardner's multiple intelligence 
hypothesis, 132 
gray matter of, 35 
Greek study of, 7-8 

250 
Index 
Brain (continued) 
gyri, 30 
hemispheres of, 5, 23, 30-31 ,  33-34 
Herbart on, 138-139 
homogeneity of tissue in, 9, 25, 31-
32, 135-136 
hydraulic theories of, 7-8 
hypothalamus of, 22 
imaging of, 34-36, 46-87, 160-161, 
167-172, 1 85-204, 205-206, 208-
209 
and intelligence, 89, 91 
interconnection of regions in, 1 6 1-
163 
and invasive techniques, 38-40, 42-
46, 1 63-164 
and Kleist's map, 109-1 10 
and language, 22, 1 15-1 16, 1 54, 
1 82-185 
and learning, 1 8-19 
and lesion experiments, 44-45, 1 1 8-
1 1 9, 159-160, 1 63-165, 173-175 
lobes, 30-31 
localization in, 1-2, 6-14, 20-27, 
102-109, 172-179, 212-214 
Locke on, 99-100 
and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRl), 74-85 
mass action theory of, 12-13 
measuring regional function in, 38-
40 
medulla, 33 
and memory, 21-22, 33, 207 
and mental function, 13-14, 35, 41, 
89-93 
and modern imaging taxonomy, 
133-135 
modular systems of, 1 76 
and motor function, 12, 13, 22, 41, 
46-50, 156-158 
neurons in, 33, 1 55-158 
nineteenth century study of, 9-1 1 
and noninvasive technologies, 3-4, 
46-87, 185-1 86, 208-209 
nuclei of, 35-36, 37(figure) 
occipital area of, 1 1  
and phrenological taxonomy of cog­
nitive function, 102-109 
and positron emission tomography 
(PET), 68-74 
and recovery of function after injury, 
166 
and reductionism, 210 
regions of, 43, 135-138, 153-165, 
175-176, 212-214 
relation to the mind, 4-6, 89-93, 
182-1 85, 206-207 
and selective deactivation, 43-44 
and sensory-transformational-re-
sponse mechanisms, 145 
and sexuality, 22 
Shallice on, 141-142, 175-178 
size, 34 
and the skull, 102-109 
and sleep, 22-23 
Spearman and Thurstone's factor 
analysis of, 125-127 
and speech, 1 1 ,  154 
and the spinal cord, 33-34 
stem, 30, 32, 33 
Sternberg on, 127-132 
study of, 3-4, 29-30, 34 
sulci, 30 
surgical study of, 38-40, 42-46 
Thorndike on, 139-141 
and trauma, 1 65-166, 179 
twentieth century studies of, 1 1-14 
unity hypothesis of, 6 
visual cortex of, 1 1, 21 
and Welker's taxonomy, 1 1  0-1 1 1 ,  
1 12-1 13(table) 
Wernicke area of, 22 
white matter of, 35 
Wolff on, 100-102 
X rays of, 34-35, 56-61 
Broca area, 22 
Brodmann regions, 32, 33(figure) 
Brown, Thomas, 94 
Cerebellum, 30, 1 57-158 
and memory, 33 
Cerebral cortex, 30-33, 34, 36 
Chemicals 
and selective deactivation, 45-46 
and study of the brain, 41-42 
Chomsky, Noam, 1 1 5-116 
Cognitive processes, 15-20, 23 
and attention, 148-149 
and behaviorism, 206-207, 214-
218, 219 
Chomsky on, 1 15-1 1 6  
and cognitive faculties, 1 1 6-1 1 8  
conceptual problems with, 1 97-
200 
and consciousness, 148-149 
and contradictory data, 200-203 
difficulty in defining, 89-93, 143-
146, 147-152 
and dissociation experiments, 179-
1 8 1  
early taxonomies of, 93-99 
Fodor on, 96-99, 1 1 1-1 15 
Gall on, 102-109 
and interconnection of brain regions, 
161-163 
linearization of, 188-190 
Locke on, 99-100 
mathematical interpretations in, 
187-188 
and phrenological taxonomy of cog­
nition, 1 02-109 
and regions of the brain, 155-161, 
175-176 
and relationship of the mind to the 
brain, 4-6 
and the subtractive method, 1 86-
195 
and Welker's taxonomy, 1 1  0-1 1 1 ,  
1 12-1 13(table) 
Wolff on, 100-102 
Compartmentalization, 135, 140-
141 
Consciousness, 148-149 
Craniology, 102-109 
CT scans. See Tomography, computer­
assisted 
Cybulski, N. N., 154 
Index 
Damadian, Raymond, 80-82 
da Vinci, Leonardo, 9, 34 
Descartes, Rene, 94 
251 
Dissection of the brain, 32 
Dissociation experiments, 179-185 
Dolphins, 34 
Edinburgh Review, 105 
Electrical currents 
and direct electrical recording, 46-50 
and macroelectrodes, 47-50 
and microelectrodes, 47-50 
and motor function, 46-50 
produced by the brain, 10-1 1 
and stimulation of the brain, 10-1 1 ,  
14, 40-42 
and study of the brain, 3, 22, 40-42 
Electroencephalograph (EEG), 3. See 
also Noninvasive technologies 
and behavior, 51-52 
Emotions, 23, 140 
Encephalization, 7 
Essay Concerning Human Under­
standing, An, 1 00 
Evoked brain potential (EBP), 3, 52-
56. See also Noninvasive technolo­
gies 
Experiments. See Invasive techniques; 
Noninvasive technologies 
Extirpation, surgical, 43-45 
Factor analysis, 1 1 9-123 
Spearman and Thurstone's, 125-127 
Flourens, Pierre, 1 05-107 
Fluoroscopy, 59-60 
Fodor, Jerry, 96-99, 1 1 1-1 15 
Frogs, 40 
Functional magnetic resonance imag­
ing (fMRI), 85-87, 167-172, 1 93-
1 94. See also Magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRl) 
Gage, Phineas, 23, 165 
Gall, Franz Joseph, 102-109 
Galton, Francis, 123-124 

252 
Index 
Galvani, Luigi, 40 
Gardner's multiple intelligence hy-
pothesis, 132 
Gassendi, Pierre, 99 
Gray matter, 35 
Greeks, the, 7-8, 93 
Gyri of the brain, 30 
Hamilton, William, 101 
Hartley, David, 94 
Herbart, Johann Friedrich, 138-139 
Hippocrates, 7 
Hobbes, Thomas, 94 
Hydraulic theories of the brain, 7-8 
Hyperactivity, childhood, 5-6 
Hypothalamus, 22 
Imaging. See Noninvasive technolo­
gies 
In telligence, 89, 9 1  
and factor analysis, 1 1 9-123 
and Gardner's multiple intelligence 
hypothesis, 132 
Sternberg on, 127-132 
Invasive techniques, 38-40, 1 63-164. 
See also Noninvasive technologies 
and surgical extirpation, 43-45 
Kant, Immanuel, 100 
Kleist's map, 109-1 10 
Language, 22, 154, 182-1 85 
Chomsky on, 1 15-1 16 
Lashley, Karl S., 12-13 
Learning, 18-19, 207 
Lesion experiments, 44-45, 1 1 8-1 19, 
154 
Lobes, brain, 30-31 
Localization 
and behaviorism, 214-218 
and chemical stimulation, 41-42 
of cognitive processes, 25-27, 135-
138, 150-161, 197-200, 21 1-214 
conceptual problems with, 172-179 
and contradictory data, 200-203 
and dissociation experiments, 1 79-
185 
early theories of, 1 1-12 
and electrical stimulation, 40-42 
experiments, 36-37, 152-153 
Gall on, 102-109 
and interconnection of brain regions, 
161-163 
of learning, 207 
and lesion experiments, 1 63-165, 
173-175 
mathematical interpretations in, 
151-152, 187-1 88 
of memory, 21-22, 207 
and modern imaging taxonomy, 
133-135 
and phrenological taxonomy of cog-
nitive function, 102-109 
and physiology, 1 90-193 
and psychobiology, 20-27 
and recovery of function after injury, 
166 
and regions of the brain, 135-
138 
study of, 1, 5-6, 21-24, 205-212 
and the subtractive method, 1 86-
195 
surgical study of, 42-46 
and the visual cortex, 21 
Locke, John, 94, 99-100 
Macroelectrodes, 47-50 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
74-85 
applications of, 83-85 
artifacts in, 1 71-172 
discovery of, 74-75 
functional (fMRI), 85-87, 167-172, 
193-194 
and noise, 1 95-197 
and nuclear magnetic resonance, 76-
79 
open, 83 
and radio frequency signals, 78-80 
and relaxation time, 79-82 
threshold effect in, 167-169, 185-
1 86 
Maimonides, 93-94 
Mass action theory of the brain, 12-
13, 1 73 
Medulla, 33 
Memory, 21-22, 207 
and the cerebellum, 33 
Mental function, 13-14, 35, 41. See 
also Brain, the; Mind, the 
and attention, 137, 148-149 
Chomsky on, 1 15-1 16 
and classification of cognitive pro­
cesses, 93-99, 143-146 
components of, 143-146, 148, 182-
185 
and consciousness, 148-149 
difficulty in defining, 89-93, 143-
146, 147-152, 2 1 1  
early taxonomies of, 93-99 
and face recognition, 199-200 
and factor analysis, 1 1 9-123 
Fodor on, 96-99, 1 1 1-115 
Galton's taxonomy of, 123-124 
and Gardner's multiple intelligence 
hypothesis, 132 
Herbart on, 138-139 
and language, 1 82-185 
Locke on, 99-100 
and physiology, 1 90-1 93 
and relationship of the mind to the 
brain, 206-207 
Shallice on, 141-142 
Sternberg on, 127-132 
Thorndike on, 139-141 
and Welker's taxonomy, 11 0-1 1 1 ,  
1 12-1 13(table) 
Wolff on, 100-102 
Microelectrodes, 47-50 
Mill, James, 94 
Mill, John, 94 
Mind, the. See also Brain, the; Mental 
function 
and attention, 137, 148-149 
and behavior, 206-207, 214-219 
Index 
253 
Chomsky on, 1 15-1 1 6  
and cognitive faculties, 1 1 6-1 18 
compartmentalization of, 135, 140-
141 
and consciousness, 148-149 
and difficulty in defining cognitive 
processes, 89-93, 2 1 1  
early taxonomies of, 93-99 
and face recognition, 1 99-200 
and factor analysis, 1 1 9-123 
Fodor on, 96-99, 1 1 1-115 
and Galton's taxonomy, 123-124 
and Gardner's multiple intelligence 
hypothesis, 132 
Herbart on, 138-139 
Locke on, 99-100 
and modern imaging taxonomy, 
133-135 
and phrenological taxonomy of cog­
nitive function, 102-109 
and regions of the brain, 135-138 
relation to the brain, 4-6, 1 82-1 85, 
206-207 
Shallice on, 141-142 
Spearman and Thurstone's factor 
analysis of, 125-127 
Sternberg on, 127-132 
Thorndike on, 139-141 
and Welker's taxonomy, 1 1  0-1 1 1, 
1 12-1 13(table) 
Motor function, 12, 13, 22, 41, 156-
158 
and electrical stimulation, 46-50 
Neurons, 33, 155-158 
Noninvasive technologies, 3-4, 34-
36, 160-161, 208-209. See also In­
vasive techniques 
and contradictory data, 200-203 
and direct electrical recording, 46-50 
and electroencephalograms (EEG), 3, 
50-52 
and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI), 79-87, 1 67-172, 1 85-1 86, 
1 93-194 

254 
Index 
Noninvasive technologies (continued) 
mathematical interpretations in, 
1 87-188 
and noise, 1 95-197 
and positron emission tomography 
(PET), 201-202 
and statistics, 1 95-197 
and tomography, 3, 36 
Nuclei of the brain, 35-36, 37(figure) 
Outlines of Phrenology, 103 
Phrenology, 102-109 
Plato, 93 
Pneuma, 7 
Poe, Edgar Allan, 105 
Psychobiology, 2, 15-20, 210-211. 
See also Psychology, physiological 
and behaviorism, 206-207 
and cognitive faculties, 1 16-1 1 8  
and difficulty in defining cognitive 
processes, 89-93, 143-146 
and electroencephalograms (EEG), 
5 1  
and localization of cognitive pro­
cesses, 4-6, 20-27 
Psychology, physiological, 24, 26-27, 
210-211. See also Psychobiology 
and Christian Wolff, 100-102 
and cognitive faculties, 1 16-1 1 8  
and evoked brain potential (EBP), 
54-56 
and Kleist's map, 109-1 10 
Radiation. See Tomography; X rays 
Rats, 156 
Reductionism, 210 
Reid, Thomas, 101 
Roentgen, Wilhelm Konrad von, 56-
57 
Roman Catholic Church, the, 9, 39 
Scientists 
Arabic, 9 
Greek, 7-8, 93 
nineteenth century, 9-1 1 
twentieth century, 1 1-14 
Selective deactivation, 43-44 
and chemical stimulation, 45-46 
Sensory-transformational-response 
mechanisms, 145 
Sexuality, 22 
Shallice, Timothy, 1 1 8-1 1 9, 141-142, 
1 75-178 
Skull, the, 38 
and phrenological taxonomy of cog-
nitive function, 102-109 
Sleep, 22-23 
Spearman, Charles E., 125-127 
Speech, 1 1, 154 
Spinal cord, 33-34 
Spinal roots, 33 
Spurzheim, johann, 102-109 
Statistics, 195-197 
Stem, brain, 30, 32, 33 
Sternberg, R. ]., 127-132 
Stewart, Dugald, 101 
Subjectivity, 149 
Subtractive method, 1 86-195 
Sulci of the brain, 30 
Surgical study of the brain, 38-40, 
42-46 
and selective deactivation, 43-
44 
Swammerdam, jan, 40 
Taxonomy of cognitive processes 
associationist, 97 
Chomsky on, 1 15-1 16 
difficulty in defining, 89-93, 143-
146 
early theories of, 93-99 
Fodor on, 96-99, 1 1 1-1 15 
Galton's, 123-124 
horizontal functional, 97 
modern, 133-135 
neo-Cartesian, 96-97 
phrenological, 102-109 
and Spearman and Thurstone's fac­
tor analysis, 125-127 
vertical functional, 97 
Welker's, 1 1 0-1 1 1 ,  1 12-11 3(table) 
Thomasius, Christian, 99 
Thorndike, Edward, 139-141 
Thurstone, L. L., 125-127 
Titchener, Edward, 94 
Tomography. See also Invasive tech-
niques; Noninvasive technologies; 
X rays 
computer-assisted X-ray, 61-68 
computerized axial (CAT), 3, 62 
drawbacks to, 68 
image reconstruction, 64-68 
linear, 61-62 
positron emission (PET), 3, 
66(figure), 68-74, 1 54-155, 1 69-
1 70, 201-202 
Trauma, 23, 1 65-166, 1 79 
Valsalva, Antonio Maria, 9 
Van Orden, Guy, 1 82-1 84 
Ventricles, cerebral, 8 
Vesalius, Andreas, 8, 9 
Visual cortex, 1 1 , 21 
Ward, james, 94 
Welker's taxonomy, 1 1  0-1 1 1 ,  1 12-
1 13(table) 
Wernicke area, 22 
Whales, 34 
White matter, 35 
Whitman, Walt, 105 
Willis, Thomas, 9 
Wolff, Christian, 100-102 
Wundt, Wilhelm, 94 
X rays, 34-35. See also Tomography 
computer-assisted tomography, 61-
68 
conventional, 56-61 
equipment, 59-61 
and fluoroscopy, 59-60 
image reconstruction, 64-68 
wavelength and energy of, 57-59 
Index 
255 

